Abstract
========

*Platform Design* is a study of different viewpoints on the creation of
digital systems, and how they converge in platforms designed, built, and
managed by communities. As sociotechnical constructs in which features
emerge through the interaction of different stakeholders, platforms are
understood as both means and outcomes—the ‘things’ or boundary objects
in a design process—generating the spaces where communities of practice
can form.

Utilizing two strongly interwoven timelines in education and research
(both in academia and industry), the thesis shifts the centre of balance
in actor–networks by iteratively recalibrating from a
techno-deterministic analysis towards a community-driven one. The
theoretical background in the fields of cybernetics, critical theory,
design, and the sociology of technology frames the empirical work, which
consists of academic publications, design reports, and the publicly
available documentation of realized projects. In the space between
theory and praxis, a methodological toolbox is developed, a posteriori
revisiting experiences gathered over a decade Drawing on a series of
functional concepts, the thesis proposes an alternative co-design
framework, termed *inclusive multiple prototyping*. Meant to augment new
sensibilities that are pertinent to the design process of platforms,
this framework addresses the inherent complexity of actor–networks and
human–machine communities.

In practical terms, the thesis describes a series of projects, some of
which can be considered platforms, while others would be better
categorized as tools, toolboxes, kits, or infrastructure. These include
co-creating the Arduino community, repurposing kitchen appliances for
connection to the cloud, designing a modular prototyping platform
involving programming and electronics, deploying an indoor location
system, creating educational kits for upper secondary school teachers,
and inventing new haptic interactive interfaces. Some of the projects
required the long-term involvement of the researcher in intimate
communities of practice; others were temporal interventions, yet reached
thousands of users. Practice-based and transdisciplinary, the thesis
contributes to the field of interaction design by bringing in elements
of a sociotechnical discourse, while problematizing notions such as
democracy and governance, openness of tools and outcomes, modularity,
generalizability, and transferability—the three latter terms further
fuelling the research questions. The research shows that these are
properties that enable the creation of platforms, although the question
remains whether there is such a thing as a standardized platform. While
this thesis touches upon the potentials of state-of-the-art platform
technology, it also points to the fact that there is work to be done,
socially, ethically, and politically, when considering the augmentation
of platforms for everyday use as pervasive and artificial intelligence
agents.


