3 Papers
========

This chapter looks at the papers selected for the compilation. They fall
into four groups, produced throughout the duration of the thesis. The
common thread is the creation of various types of platforms, with the
exception of ‘Resign Desearch’ (Cuartielles 2004)⁠, which I wrote at the
start of my research as manifesto for what interaction design should be
in future.

The papers describe five different platforms in which I had varying
degrees of involvement. In some of them my role was merely that of
interaction designer, as in the indoor location system (Casas et al.
2002, 2007)⁠, while in others I was a developer or even the head
designer. My role shifted between projects, giving me the opportunity to
form an understanding of how different specialists can influence the
creation of platforms. Each of the papers thus presents a different
researcher, developer, designer, or project, as is reflected in the
written form of each. I begin with a timeline to contextualize the
compilation and trace its ‘common thread’ (Chapter 1) and then introduce
each paper, my role, and the outcome, concluding with the key points to
emerge from the papers.

<span id="anchor"></span>The compilation in context
---------------------------------------------------

The thesis compilation comprises four groups of papers from a period of
some fifteen years (see Fig. XXX), which report projects on the practice
of research through design, the real-life deployment of wireless sensor
networks, the design of connected platforms, the creation of modular
electronic systems, and the implementation and testing of wearable
artefacts. The common thread in all the papers is contemporary design
practice, with its implementation of prototypes, testing with users,
iteration of concepts, and reflection both during and at the end of the
process.

(*i*) Research through design

D. Cuartielles, Resign desearch: The Darwinian evolution of contemporary
thought species. In P. Ehn & J. Lowgren (eds.), *Design \[x\] research:
Essays on interaction design as knowledge construction* (Malmö: Malmö
University Press, 2004).

(*ii*) Indoor location systems

R. Casas, D.Cuartielles, Á. Marco, H. J. Gracia & J. L. Falcó. Hidden
issues in deploying an indoor location system. *IEEE Pervasive
Computing*, 6(2) (2007), 62–9.

(*iii*) European research projects

D. Cuartielles & D. Taylor. *Delivery number D2.1: Datasheets for SandS
Motherboard and Modules* (Malmö: Social&Smart, 2013b) \[SandS\].

D. Cuartielles. *Delivery number D2.2: Report on Thinking Appliance
Manual* (Malmö: Social&Smart, 2014a). \[SandS\].

D. Cuartielles, E. Katterfeldt, G. Dabisias & A. Berner (2015).
*Delivery number 4.2: Report on Final STEM Learning Kit with Integrated
Learning Analytics for Trials* (Malmö: PELARS, 2015) \[PELARS\].

(*iv*) Exploration of haptics

D. Cuartielles, A. Göransson, T. Olsson & S. Stenslie. Mobile haptic
technology development through artistic exploration. *Haptic and Audio
Interaction Design* (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2012b), 31–40.

D. Cuartielles, A. Göransson, T. Olsson & S. Stenslie. Developing Visual
Editors for High-Resolution Haptic Patterns. *The Seventh International
Workshop on Haptic and Audio Interaction Design*, 42–4 (Lund: HaptiMap,
2012c)

D. Cuartielles, A. Göransson, T. Olsson & S. Stenslie. Telehaptic
Awareness. In *Proceedings of the 7th conference on Tangible, embodied
and embedded Interaction, TEI 2013*, 1–8 (New York: ACM, 2013c).

The papers—except for the ‘Resign Desearch’ manifesto (Cuartielles
2004)—report project findings that were strongly influenced by the
framework suggested in Chapter 2 concerning size, performance, and pace.
For each project, I designed tools in collaboration with other
researchers and users, aimed at making platforms, using state-of-the-art
technology that sent data to other devices in a network. The context of
all of the projects is a networked society where non-humans share agency
with the other actors: hence kitchens that suggest recipes on the basis
of an information exchange with other kitchens and cooks; educational
platforms that invite teachers to offer help to a group of students
because they detect a certain pattern of behaviour during a class;
garments that connect groups of people across the whole planet; and
physical interaction patterns of numerous devices programmed through
visual interfaces.

Referring to Björgvinsson et al. (2012) on infrastructuring, it was the
goal of all the projects to create a technology that would enhance
quality of life through the intermediation of networked digital devices
and services. Some of the projects had a greater platform value than
others: the indoor location system was clearly intended to be an
underlying technology to which services could be added; it was planned
that the SandS project would set the de facto standard for how to
recycle existing kitchen appliances, grouping them in the connected
kitchens of the future with distributed intelligence between artefact
and network; the PELARS project was intended as education
infrastructure, available at all schools; and haptics experiments
represent a series of kits created to enhance human communication via
physical feedback, while at the same time being part of an IoT network
of wearable devices.

These papers are the result of projects which, as the thesis timeline
shows (Fig. XXX), ran in parallel to other initiatives I also
participated in. It is impossible to consider the various projects
presented in this thesis as isolated experiments, as they were done in
conjunction with the testing of other concepts. Ideas, prototypes,
processes, and all kinds of design tools and outcomes cross-pollinated
the various projects. Therefore, in choosing the papers for the
compilation, I have maximized the conceptual coverage of my work while
keeping the core aspects of platform design represented in the text.

<span id="anchor-1"></span><span id="anchor-2"></span><span id="anchor-1"></span>Resign desearch
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I chose the first publication (Cuartielles 2004)⁠ because it deals with
the etymology of the word ‘design’ and what different authors think
about it. Inspired by Gaver (2012) I wrote a manifesto for what I
thought I should work towards. With my technical background I had a
deeper understanding of technology than other designers in my context—I
could make use of technology much as craftsmen would work with other
materials. In Redström’s words (2001, iii)⁠, ‘computational things can
become integral parts of everyday environments’ through the use of
‘everyday materials in the design of computational things’. I tried to
move beyond this view in my research, however, as I encountered, and
continue to find, more and more examples of computational things
becoming everyday design materials.

My essay ‘Resign Desearch’ thus set out to demystify the use of physical
computing technology as a tool for creation. At the time, it was
becoming increasingly common for interaction design projects to feature
some specific technical element. Designers from all disciplines would
learn about a certain technology and make a project from that. The claim
behind this first publication was simple: given properly designed
technology, it should be possible to use it the same way a tailor uses
fabric or a carpenter uses wood. It should be possible to have as
outcome not just one piece, but a whole collection, since it should be
possible to use technology as sketching material.

I first looked at the origins of the terms ‘design’ and ‘research’ in
different languages. My intention was to set the tone for what it could
mean and how it could be positioned in order to occupy a unique space in
the academic landscape. Design research (DR), or research through design
as described by Gaver (2012)⁠, can make use of subjectivity, and uses
case studies to offer a different view or problematization of a given
field. Applied qualitative research, DR’s hallmark, is now more accepted
as an academic discipline, because of the combination of its main
ethnographic techniques with more traditional survey production
(Creswell & Plano Clark 2011)⁠.

By the end of the essay I had reverse-engineered design research by
using the expression ‘resign desearch’. A pragmatic manifesto for a
different kind of research for the design field, it allowed for
playfulness, and sometimes political incorrectness. It was an attempt to
name a field of design that would embrace exploration through play,
surveys through intervention, and learning through observation.

### <span id="anchor-3"></span>The resign desearch manifesto

To contextualize the manifesto, it was written as I began my research,
when I had been very active creating user experiences as part of the
Aeswad art group and collaborating with the designers behind the Unsworn
company in Malmö, Sweden.^[^1^](#fn1){#fnref1 .footnoteRef}^ The
collaboration, which took place in 2003, was called ‘Desearch and
Revelopment’ (*sic*) and consisted of the creation of a series of
outfits that were enhanced with technology.^[^2^](#fn2){#fnref2
.footnoteRef}^ I was the only participant in this experiment who was
fully trained in electronics, which meant I was responsible for making
some of the electronic prototypes we were to wear. At the same time I
was working with the ‘Mobility and Learning’ project at Malmö
University, where I interacted with students trying to figure out how
different tools and spaces affected learning processes. I was then
strongly under the influence of the work done at the RCA in the field of
‘critical design’ (Dunne 1999), which led me to write a manifesto that
combined a range of ideas: the inclusion of participants in the design,
the negotiation of design outcomes, and the use of unconventional
methods. Given my background as an engineer, this was a way for me to
trace a line of work that would see me do research through design and
less using traditional engineering methods.

One passage in the manifesto reads as follows:

> ‘Resign Desearch’ becomes the term that refers to reaffirming the
> essence of searching with unconventional methods … RD cannot afford to
> fail in a research process. In order to do research, we have to make
> design, which will probably imply the study of people. The ideology of
> RD is not allowing it to fail when counting with people, either users
> or clients, as receivers of the design result. Therefore, hypothesis
> testing is not a tool to be used, in order not to have an excuse to be
> right even if the goal is not achieved. RD has to learn both from the
> successes and from the failures, but then we cannot stop calling
> things what they are. (Cuartielles 2004, 34)

In this way, resign desearch is defined as a variety of co-design,
which, because user involvement is so important, cannot fail. I
specifically mentioned hypothesis testing, a research method that could
come to a negative conclusion as a way of exemplifying the fact that
failure with capital F is not an option if users are involved. The
result might end up being entirely different from what was expected,
even transforming the research question, but there is no failure as such
because there was no preconceived goal.

Hypothesis testing, which may result in failure or even falsification,
might provoke user rejection depending on the degree of involvement.
Yves Zimmermann, one of the authors I discussed in the paper, introduced
the idea of ‘success vs failure’. While ‘the designer’s duty is to
produce satisfactory solutions’ (Zimmermann 1998), the term
‘satisfactory’ can be found to be controversial in the sense that, as an
academic discipline, design should be allowed to adhere to the same
paradigms as the rest of academia. It should be possible, for example,
to conduct design research just to falsify a theory. Design research,
however, is often conducted in a different way to other disciplines, and
often involves users much earlier in the research process than for
example, in pharmacology, where clinical trials may take years. However,
Zimmermann was not talking about academic design research; he is a
practitioner and was addressing the situation when a designer working
for a certain user is facing a deadline and has to provide that user
with a valid solution. There are different ways to achieve this goal of
finding ‘preferred’ solutions that will still satisfy the user. While
participatory design, which implies far greater user involvement in the
design process, was Zimmermann’s answer, another way—as I suggested in
the manifesto—could be the creation of collections, providing a range of
possible solutions to the one problem. My suggestion was that RD, as a
sub-discipline of interaction design, was the obvious choice of field
where, given the time and resources, one could always find a positive
solution to a challenge. I explored this idea of collections further in
the manifesto:

> RD is not having single results as outcome for projects. It will
> either propose to use already existing services, devices, and tools,
> or it will conclude with a ‘collection’ … The day will come when
> instead of thinking about prototyping as putting electronic components
> together, we will take the interfaces for each cognitive nexus from a
> box and will attach them together on a device … Everyone in this
> business will work with collection as a basic way of designing, and we
> will evaluate more complex patterns of interaction. (Cuartielles 2004,
> 34)

At that point, though, I was unaware of Schon’s notion of repertoire.
‘As a practitioner experiences many variations of a small number of
types of cases’, writes Schön, ‘he is able to “practice” his practice, …
develop a repertoire of expectations, images, and techniques’ (1983a,
60)⁠. Nor was I familiar with Gaver’s notion of the annotated portfolio
(2012)⁠. Yet both concepts could have shaped the notion of collections,
shedding light on how the notion plays out in the present. My vision in
the manifesto of modular electronics is becoming a reality, and since
basic digital electronics are now a commodity, it is possible to design
using standard off-the-shelf parts, rather than having to start each
time from first principles. As proposed in the manifesto, this enables
designers to incorporate electronics as well as users in their
prototypes at a much earlier stage.

<span id="anchor-4"></span>Hidden issues in deploying an indoor location system
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The indoor location system (ILS) was a project conceptualized by Jorge
Falco and Roberto Casas at the University of Zaragoza (Unizar). I joined
as interaction designer to help with the design of the user interface
that would define how people would use it, and also to define how people
would interact with it as a component in an existing control dashboard
of some kind. In a way, my role was to help define an application
programming interface (API) for other software packages to connect to
the ILS. I would then build an example, the so-called space software
development kit (SSDK), a software package to augment spaces with
localized sound feedback that would be featured at the exhibition at the
Participatory Design Conference PDC04. The ILS would be a peripheral to
what I called the space hardware development kit (SHDK), which included
the ILS and computers as navigation tools.

The ILS was made of three different blocks: a series of beacons, one or
more tags, and a computer. The beacons sent synchronized ultrasound
pulses for the tags to receive. The tags would tell the computer using
Bluetooth when they had received pulses from each beacon. The computer
could calculate the time of flight for the ultrasound signals for each
tag, and by calculating that block of data it could estimate the
location of each tag to within five centimetres. This kind of result was
far ahead of other technical solutions at the time. The software created
for making all of these complex calculations, PISHA (Positioning Indoor
System of High Accuracy), included an open communication port for other
software packages to use the positioning information. I built a
prototype to show the possibilities of such a system in the creation of
soundscapes (Cuartielles & Malmborg 2004)⁠ in what I envisaged as a
future platform for the artistic augmentation of spaces by sound.

The article published in the *Pervasive Computing Journal* (Casas et al.
2007)⁠ is a summary of the design work done by the whole team for the
ILS. Technical features were presented along with configuration
possibilities, UI design, connectivity, and thoughts about the future of
a system like this one. The most important aspect of the article in the
present context is the suggested reappropriation of existing spaces by
new technology that was not planned to be installed there in the first
instance, a topic that was among the hidden issues we discovered during
the iterative process of mounting and dismounting the
system.^[^3^](#fn3){#fnref3 .footnoteRef}^ When implementing platforms
that have any kind of material manifestation, there is going to be a
tension between the old materiality—the space where the platform will be
deployed—and the new materiality—the combination of the space itself
together with the system—which has to be factored into the design
process from the start. Equally, it is not possible to anticipate all
the challenges that will be faced during the design process, hence the
‘hidden issues’.

EU reports as design diaries
----------------------------

I supplied deliverables for two EU projects—deliverables D2.1 and D2.2
for the SandS project (Cuartielles & Taylor 2013b; Cuartielles 2014a)
and deliverable D4.2 for the PELARS project (Cuartielles et al. 2015)—in
the form of design diaries, including descriptions of parts, reflections
on the design process, what worked, and so on. My role in both projects
was as head of the Arduino group’s research, coordinating the
development of technologies, handling communications with partners,
participating in co-design sessions in order to conceptualize
prototypes, and coordinating the academic effort behind the projects. On
occasion I also acted as developer, and either designed circuit boards
or wrote code for some of the prototypes. I edited the deliverables from
that perspective, describing the technologies we had created ad hoc for
the SandS and PELARS projects. Even if the projects related to very
different contexts, the tools we created are highly relevant to the
discussion here.

### <span id="anchor-5"></span>SandS

The SandS project (‘Social and Smart: Social housekeeping through
intercommunicating appliances and shared recipes merged in a pervasive
web-services infrastructure’) ran from 2012 to early 2016. The main goal
was the creation of an ecology of smart kitchen appliances that would
share information in a social network where devices and people would
interact and share recipes. There were two types: machine-centred
recipes and human-centred recipes. The machine recipes were lists of
sequential tasks for the machines to perform, where the commands were
sent from a virtual representation of themselves down to the actual
hardware. It was as if the machine’s intelligence—its smartness—was
placed on the cloud. The human recipes were also lists of tasks involved
in certain chores or cooking. The human recipes could be translated into
machine recipes, taking into account that two of the same appliances
(for example, two ovens) could be entirely different in terms of heating
elements or fans, but also in terms of affordances on the interface.

People could search for recipes on a social network (for example,
‘remove red fruit stain’) and the network would do a semantic analysis
to determine whether the database contained anything remotely similar
(for example, ‘wash out strawberry stain’) and offer the users the
closest response possible. The SandS middleware—a piece of software
residing on the cloud—represented each one of the devices in a kitchen
as well as the sensors and actuators for each one. In that way, the
middleware translated the human recipes into a generic machine recipe,
and later, by adding the information specific to the device in the
user’s kitchen, translated it into a recipe valid for that appliance.

My role in that project was to design and manufacture a series of
electronic circuit boards—a modular electronics kit—to be used to hack
any sort of appliance and connect it to the SandS cloud via
Wi-Fi.^[^4^](#fn4){#fnref4 .footnoteRef}^ My report ‘D2.1 Datasheets for
SandS Motherboard and Modules’ (Cuartielles & Taylor 2013b) explains the
nuances of this kit. It is made of a series of boards (motherboard +
modules: Relay, MOSFET, Consumption, UI, Sensor); firmware for each of
the modules; an operating system for the motherboard; and a piece of
software to configure the addresses to each module via a personal
computer. The report has sections for each of the boards as discrete
objects, presenting their main features.

The work I did on this project included the design, test, validation,
and manufacture of boards for all the partners to use in their
experiments, which was why it had to be developed early in the process.
Creating the boards presented some difficulties, since the concept
behind them was unique and required a novel integration of technologies.
I contributed to a microcontroller board—the motherboard—and a protocol
to configure an appliance over a digital port. The motherboard was a
dual-processor board with wireless connectivity that could run a
state-of-the-art operating system (in this case
OpenWRT),^[^5^](#fn5){#fnref5 .footnoteRef}^ but could also circumvent
all the possible risks from latency in the processor when performing
communication actions by adding a second microcontroller, exclusively in
order to control the physical parts of the appliance.

The protocol allowed for endless configurations of the various modules,
automatically assigning them addresses when connected to the motherboard
through special configuration software running on a personal computer.
We realized that, in order to control most of the existing appliances on
the market, we just needed to create a small number of different modules
in order to hack the physical actuators and sensors on an appliance
and—through the motherboard—map those on their virtual representation on
the cloud. The second SandS report ‘D2.2 Report on Thinking Appliance
Manual’ (Cuartielles 2014a) goes beyond how each one of the boards work
to explain how to set about hacking an appliance, step by step, in order
to make it SandS-compatible.

SandS offered an insight into what was needed in the way of hardware to
create a modular electronics platform, but there was little opportunity
in the project to explore the affordances of this modular system with
end users. In a sense, SandS was never meant to be a project for end
users; it was intended for technicians, who would hack the appliances
that end users would use. Therefore, there was not much thought of how
the system could be used in, say, an educational context where the same
modules would be used and abused by multiple people. SandS was meant to
be mounted once and left there. Therefore, being more than a platform,
SandS should be defined as a kit. If there had been a continuation of
the project, a deployment of a certain size, and a discussion with users
about how to make sense of some of the lessons learnt while testing,
this system could easily have become a platform. However, as long as it
did not leave the research labs, it was just a fully functional
candidate for a platform.

### <span id="anchor-6"></span>PELARS

The PELARS project (‘Practice-based experiential learning analytics
research and support’), which ran between 2013 and 2017, existed to
support project-based learning scenarios where students would work in
groups to create new artefacts. The various partners collaborated on the
creation of a new type of classroom setting, with islands where the
student groups could work. Each one of the islands included a complex
technological augmentation dedicated to tracking whether the students
spent time talking to one another, interacting with materials, coding,
or simply staring at the screen. The islands were round tables, designed
to allow the students to work standing or sitting. The desk had a
computer embedded, but also a whiteboard and a simple storage for
materials.

The technical augmentation of this computer-supported collaborative
learning environment consisted of a computer running a software called
the Collector, dedicated to the capture of data coming from the
different sensed contexts. A combination of infrared and RGB cameras
were capable of tracking the students’ location and, using the passive
markers the students wore, the direction they were looking. This allowed
us to measure complex behaviour such as whether the participants in the
experiments were using their hands for building or for programming. We
could also note if our subjects were looking at the screen, at one
another, or at something else. The system had a ‘sentiment capturing
mechanism’: a reduced keyboard made of only two large buttons that could
be pressed to indicate if the students were facing an issue with the
experiment or if they wanted to mark that they had a good feeling about
their project. Together with my team at Arduino Verkstad AB, I created a
new type of prototyping platform made of smart electronic blocks and a
visual programming language that the participants would use to prototype
interactive artefacts. Another of the teams created a mobile app that
students used to document their progress with short texts and images.
Finally, there was an analytics component to the project that could map
the data coming from each sensing tool, from the electronics platform,
and the sentiment buttons into an infographic that students, teachers,
and researchers could use to build an understanding of the process.

Researchers ran dozens of experiments using this system at different
locations, with students from different disciplines and age
groups.^[^6^](#fn6){#fnref6 .footnoteRef}^ They observed the processes
behind the different projects and gave a qualitative grading for each
one. Were the project to be extended, I would like to see the data
gathered from the system used create an inference engine, an AI, that
could anticipate whether students would need the teacher’s intervention
if it detected the students struggling with the code.

Such a system, constantly monitoring the development of the users
interacting with it and reporting to a server somewhere where the data
is processed, requires a very careful approach during the design, as it
can easily be classified as a surveillance system. This was a caveat we
explained every time the PELARS artefacts were presented in a public
forum. While the system captures information from those interacting with
it, all data is anonymized by design, except for the pictures that the
users will eventually capture by themselves. Simultaneously, the data
was processed and rendered as visualizations designed to be conversation
openers for the users and educators conducting the experiments. In the
long run, what we were looking for was a way of mapping the kind of
processes and interactions by those interacting with the system,
marrying it with a qualitative analysis of their work outcomes. The
intention of this mapping was not to grade those interacting with the
system, but to report in real time to the educators whether a group
might need of help.

While my role in the process was not to evaluate the ethical
considerations in this prototype, unavoidably there are questions about
whether this kind of system should be built in the first place. It is
technically possible to abuse almost any artefact, whether hardware or
software, but it would require a considerable effort to abuse a system
in which agency is purely informative. In the case of this design, there
was no process of moral delegation as described by Adam (2005)and
others—students were not to be graded because of the information
provided by the system—which certainly limits the possibility of abusing
the system.

Finally, since the PELARS project was not only a technical but also an
academic endeavour, some of its findings were published after the
project ended. Talkoo,^[^7^](#fn7){#fnref7 .footnoteRef}^ the prototype
for the physical computing experiment with students created for PELARS,
featured in the *International Journal of Child–Computer Interaction* in
an article on ‘Physical computing with plug-and-play toolkits’
(Katterfeldt et al. 2018) in which we summarized the experience of
running dozens of experiments with the physical computing toolkit, and
concluded that ‘we need to not only think about kit design but also of
learning contexts in which these kits are implemented. Physical
computing kits, ideally, should include appropriate guidance for their
implementation in educational contexts’ (9).

My report included here, ‘D4.2 Report on Final STEM Learning Kit with
Integrated Learning Analytics for Trials’ (Cuartielles et al. 2015,
17–39)⁠ covers various aspects of the Talkoo prototyping platform,
primarily the modular electronics toolkit and the visual programming
language (VPL). My team’s mission for the project was to create a
platform that would allow participants in the PELARS test campaigns to
quickly prototype a simple interactive system (by quick meaning one to
one and half hours). We had concluded that a VPL would permit easier,
faster programming of the interaction between the various modular
electronics circuits. We designed twelve of these electronic modules:
LED, RGB LED, MOSFET, relay, button, potentiometer, rotary encoder,
colour sensor, temperature sensor, Hall effect sensor, motor controller,
and servo motor controller. The modules could be connected to one
another using wires that transported not just electricity to power the
boards, but also a communication bus for the boards to exchange
information. Between the chain of modules and the computer was the
so-called hub, a special type of module with USB connectivity that
transfers the data from the USB port to the physical protocol used by
modules to share data.

The communication protocol we built for Talkoo was based on the I2C
protocol, with the addition of an automatic addressing system. By
automatic addressing I mean the special capability of this protocol to
assign addresses to the various devices interactively, while plugging in
the boards to the bus—a special addition to the I2C protocol that we
created for the project. The software for the project, as well as the
conceptual design of the interaction between blocks and between the
personal computer and the blocks, was strongly inspired by the outcomes
of the SandS project.

The VPL included representations for all of the modules, but also for a
series of logical modules for mathematical and logical operations on the
data from the blocks representing sensors. Sensor blocks typically have
outlets (a small icon at the bottom) that indicates that the block can
send out data. Actuator blocks, on the other hand, have inlets (an icon
that indicates that the block can receive data). Logical blocks can have
both inlets and outlets. The relationships between blocks can be
established by dragging (mouse click + mouse move) from the outlet of a
block into the inlet of a different one. When two blocks are connected,
a line joins the two blocks on the interface.

Without going into the technical details of the design, the VPL is
divided into front-end and back-end and follows a model–view–controller
(MVC) structure. The front-end ensures the user interaction is smooth,
while the back-end takes care of the functional representation of all
the modules, their interaction at a software level with one another and
the logical blocks, the control of the serial communication to and from
the hub, and the sending of data to the PELARS collector for analysis.
This type of structure allows for a good deal of tweaking, which this
project needed because the various tests informed the design of possible
improvements. We developed several interaction models for the VPL. For
example, one of them made the block representing a module automatically
pop up at a random location on the screen when the module connects to
the hub. In this way, people did not have to drag one block into the
program canvas for each module connected, only for the logical blocks.
Another of the interaction models showed the blocks greyed out that
students needed to perform a task, and when the student connected one of
the modules corresponding to the taxonomy drawn on the screen, its
washed-out colour would return to normal.

<span id="anchor-7"></span>Haptics
----------------------------------

Between 2011 and 2014 I had a formal collaboration with the Norwegian
artist and researcher Stahl Stenslie, and the Swedish IxD researchers
Tony Olsson and Andreas Göransson, on a project that resulted in a
series of prototypes and papers on the creation of geolocalized
interactive art pieces that included auditory and physical feedback
(Cuartielles et al. 2012a), touch and haptic feedback-based connected
garments (Cuartielles et al. 2013c), and visual programming interfaces
for haptic artefacts from dozens to hundreds of feedback mechanisms
(Cuartielles et al. 2012c)⁠. We published several brief notices,
implemented interactive art pieces, and experimented in the creation of
various electronic boards to augment digital devices such as mobile
phones with haptic feedback. We made a series of different designs
tracing a clear evolutionary path in the way we thought about designing
embodied haptic interactions.

The collaborative process that result in the publication of ‘Mobile
haptic technology development through artistic exploration’ (Cuartielles
et al. 2012a) started back in 2008, when Stenslie showed the rest of us
an early prototype of a sound- and haptic-augmented wearable piece that
required a laptop to perform. We continued by improving on that early
design by adding a board we called the ‘Dusk’.^[^8^](#fn8){#fnref8
.footnoteRef}^ This first technical collage was used by Stenslie in two
wearable artefacts: *World Ripple*, which gave the visitor a
geolocalized experience, walking through a city searching for the places
where a number of haptic experiences had been placed; and *BlindTheatre
Bodysuit*, worn indoors as part of a performance at the Norwegian
National Theatre in Oslo.

Göransson and I had been writing a library for Android phones to
communicate with the Arduino Bluetooth board, SweetBlue (Cuartielles et
al. 2011), and a book that explained how to connect Android devices such
as phones and tablets to the Arduino Mega ADK board (Göransson &
Cuartielles 2012)⁠.^[^9^](#fn9){#fnref9 .footnoteRef}^⁠ We thus had
considerable experience of the creation of interactive pieces that
combined Arduino boards for the physical interaction with Android
devices to run the intelligence, as well as connectivity aspects of
prototypes.^[^10^](#fn10){#fnref10 .footnoteRef}^ We suggested that a
simple improvement to Stenslie’s prototype was to use a mobile phone to
create and control the experience instead of a full computer, and an
Arduino board to control the haptics he planned to embed in various
garments. This became *Psychoplastic Bodysuit*, first exhibited in
Ljubljana in 2010. We evolved different designs: the Flower, a device
that could run 80 motors from a single processor; the Stitchie, used to
create a simple collar so multiple people could communicate with one
another, a design that we termed ‘telehaptic awareness’ (Cuartielles et
al. 2013c)⁠; and a full-body suit with 120 touch points (Stenslie et al.
2014)⁠. My contribution in the projects was the design of the
electronics and firmware for one of the prototypes and the creation of
the fundamental concept of a communication protocol for some of the
later designs.

<span id="anchor-8"></span>*Psychoplastic Bodysuit*, included in the
‘Mobile haptic technology development through artistic exploration’
paper (Cuartielles et al. 2012a), required us to design a new
flower-shaped circuit. It was worn on the back, largely because that was
where the laptop computer had been in Stenslie’s earlier design.
Resembling a flower, it consisted of three different boards: the
‘Cuore’, a remake of the Arduino Bluetooth, but hexagonal in shape; the
‘Leaf’, a board that could host up to 16 vibrating motors; and the power
leaf, which carried the power supply needed to provide electricity to
the whole system. The way *Psychoplastic Bodysuit* worked was ‘much like
*World Ripple* \[as it\] used GPS to geotag haptic data into zones
defined by spatial coordinates. When entering predefined zones, users
would trigger and sense the space through different combinations of
vibrotactile patterns and sound’ (36). The Flower was our first attempt
at a platform for the creation of auditory–haptic feedback, where
creators could combine geolocation as input and two different kinds of
outputs. We did not produce many prototypes, but the intention of making
something transferable was there. It was in effect a continuation of the
work I had been doing in 2003 on the ILS (Casas et al. 2004, 2007) and
the SSDK (Cuartielles & Malmborg 2004).

At Google IO 2011 (Google Developers 2011) it was announced that it was
now possible to develop physical accessories for the Android operating
system for phones and tablets by means of a new open protocol, the
Android Open Accessory (AOA) protocol (Göransson & Cuartielles
2012).^[^11^](#fn11){#fnref11 .footnoteRef}^ The novelty was that it
would be possible to send and receive data from accessories using a USB
cable while the device was charging, and that when connected the
accessory would share a URL that the Android device could use to
download an application to allow it to start communicating with the
accessory. To encourage the Google developers’ community to make
prototypes using this new protocol, Google gave away a thousand Google
ADK boards. These boards were a derivative design of the Arduino Mega,
with the addition of a chip (with the function of an USB host) that
permitted communication with mobile phones via USB. ^^ This gave us the
idea of making a reduced version of *Psychoplastic Bodysuit* that would
not need Bluetooth or as many vibration points. The aim was to make more
prototypes so that more people could experience it.

> Sense Memory experiment \[was a\] simplified the system in order to
> experiment with an outdoor theatre involving multiple users … the user
> experienced invisible ‘sculptures’ by walking around in selected
> areas. New sets of haptic sculptures/expressions were geotagged onto
> 30+ zones placed around the square. Once the user enters one of the
> invisible geographic zones the sculptures came alive inside the cape
> as a combination of binaural sounds and vibrotactile patterns. (36)

There came a point in the construction of these experiments that we
realized we needed generalizable prototypes—easily replicated and
scalable so more users could test them. This was our first attempt at a
platform done in a conscious way.

Another outcome relevant here was the creation of a series of visual
editors for haptic experiences.^[^12^](#fn12){#fnref12 .footnoteRef}^ I
had a hand in their conceptualization, but all technical credit goes to
Andreas Göransson, who did the coding. The evolution of the various
editors was documented in ‘Developing Visual Editors for High-Resolution
Haptic Patterns’ (Cuartielles et al. 2012c), where one of the main
contributions to the idea of multiple-output feedback design was the
invention of a timeline-based system to define the feedback from a
multiplicity of haptic points. The fact that we had such a system
available was crucial to its identity as a platform in the making. By
making the visual haptic editor possible, we enabled creators to easily
build their own haptic patterns, and in later versions of the software
to add them to specific locations on a map.

The experience of creating the initial haptic prototypes, together with
the concepts emerging from the different iterations of the software
created to program the behaviours of the interactive garments, led us to
create a new type of electronic module, which we called the Stitchie.
Analysed in a couple of papers, the best example was presented in the
short paper on ‘Telehaptic Awareness’ (Cuartielles et al. 2013c),
presenting a system that used four Stitchies connected to a Bluetooth
module to create a connected garment. By touching the boards inside the
garment, the wearer sent a signal to all of the other connected garments
and provided force-feedback to the other wearers in the area.

The Stitchie was a new design of a single touch-sensitive actuation
point that came from thinking about how to create systems that would
allow for easily expandable, configurable haptic systems. The basic
design consisted of a simple board to simultaneously sense whether
someone was touching it and vibrate in case it received a command
through a communication port. When touched, the board sent out an
indication through the same port. It was the resultant circuit, in an
electronic design by Tony Olsson, which was the Stitchie. It could be
connected in series in an almost endless chain, only limited by the
amount of power needed to run a number of motors simultaneously. I
contributed the protocol that made it possible to connect the Stitchies
to one another, while Göransson made the phone application that allowed
the systems to share information about the various touch points in
interaction with a standard message queue telemetry transport (MQTT)
server. The outcome of the design was two different experiments: a
necklace with four touch points that we wore for an extended period to
establish how it felt to be physically connected to a group of people
over time (Cuartielles et al. 2013c), and a full body suit with 120
touch points (Stenslie et al. 2014).

In a sense, the Stitchie board, together with a Bluetooth chip, the
software, the phone app, and the MQTT server to exchange data from
different systems were together a platform prototype. It was open to
endless configurations, but we only had so much time to try things out.

Summary
-------

In contextualizing the papers included in the compilation, in this
chapter I have explained the core concepts and relevance of each in
turn, classifying the prototypes and projects they analyse according to
the parameters described in Chapter 2—size, performance, and pace. While
a useful way of classifying the outcome of a design process, this kind
of framework has its limitations because it passes over other relevant
aspects of the projects. For example, what happened with the technology
chosen for the SandS prototypes? Should technical choices be based
solely on the expected growth of the system? Can a size-centric analysis
be sufficient to inform my design process, and especially whether a
certain technology is *good enough* to implement a platform or not? How
do other factors such as the cost of systems affect the technology’s
dissemination? Are democratic issues, understood as access to the
technology and governance of systems, addressed at all using such a
toolset? And what about the system’s sustainability? Is there a way to
ensure it works for as long as users might need it given the current
framework?

An analysis of the projects is alone insufficient to identify whether
any of the projects could have become a platform. The papers
understandably do not capture any of the nuances of the work on other
design process projects running in parallel, which were not unimportant
for the development of my understanding of platform design as a field.
The timeline (Fig. XXX) contextualizes not only the sequence of
publications, but also how they related to other projects. The issue is
that the papers do not mention those other projects, despite being
reliant on them (for example, Arduino was needed in the creation of the
SandS prototypes). Therefore, I will return later to the projects and
design processes that are relevant here, but that have not yet been
published (see Chapter 5).

The fact that relevant experience is lost when not documented in an
academic format is reason to analyse what constitutes a ‘body of work’
in a field such as interaction design, where physical prototypes,
devices, ethnographic work, manuals, code, design diaries, and so on are
decisive for the production of knowledge. The effort invested by a
design researcher in a prototype such as Talkoo for the PELARS project
does not lend itself to publication, and the same is true of the kinds
of interactions it makes possible, even though trialling it gives a
better understanding of what the prototype does. While a prototype is
not a valid academic outcome if it goes undocumented in the form of a
publication, the special challenges of practice-based, design-oriented,
experimental research and development must still be borne in mind, given
the conditioning of the academic format, and it is worth reflecting on
the need to integrate theory and praxis more closely. Chapter 4 presents
the methodology that can contribute to this, evolving as it does in the
context of participatory activist research projects, where the
difficulty of documenting what happens in an actor–network is a
pertinent issue.

<div class="footnotes">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <div id="fn1">

    </div>

    Aeswad was the acronym for ‘Am Ende Sind Wir Alle Deutsche’, an art
    group I co-founded with Otto von Busch, Pia Skoglund, and Fredrik
    Svensson, all alumni of Malmö University. This group promised to
    itself that it would leave no written record behind, and focused on
    the creation of experiments and experiences to get people to discuss
    the things they saw. The group was moderately successful, having
    been invited to the 2003 Istanbul Biennale and 2004 Berlin Biennale,
    and had a series of repeat clients, including the Swedish government
    body Innovation Skåne and the Spanish company Daisalux.

    Unsworn was an interaction design company/studio founded by two
    interaction designers from Malmö, Magnus Torstensson and Erik
    Sandelin, which worked for museums, exhibitions, and corporate
    customers until it closed in early 2017.[↩](#fnref1)

2.  <div id="fn2">

    </div>

    The work consisted of a performance in which four ‘power monks’
    travelled the world praising the pure sources of electricity. In the
    performance four men dressed up as monks, their robes tied up
    together with electromagnets. The magnets ran off a battery pack
    that each monk wore on their bellies. The performers had to approach
    people on the street and ask for permission to recharge
    their batteries. The performance was repeated several times,
    beginning in Copenhagen at the half-machine festival in the summer
    of 2003. The performers were drawn from Aeswad and
    Unsworn.[↩](#fnref2)

3.  <div id="fn3">

    </div>

    When installing the PISHA system, all of the blocks that were
    wireless and could communicate with one another and to a computer
    via Bluetooth required power cables, which meant that we could have
    avoided using a wireless technology in its design, since we still
    had to wire up the whole room to power it.[↩](#fnref3)

4.  <div id="fn4">

    </div>

    During the development of the SandS project, I always thought of it
    as a platform, largely because it seemed a way to create multiple
    configurations of modular components. But from a use perspective,
    whenever a technician goes to hack another oven of the same brand,
    SandS is just a kit: a series of parts to configure a certain type
    of artefact.[↩](#fnref4)

5.  <div id="fn5">

    </div>

    OpenWRT is a Linux-based operating system intended for embedded
    devices, largely for access points to the Internet.[↩](#fnref5)

6.  <div id="fn6">

    </div>

    There were 52 recorded sessions with 128 users, and an additional
    150 users involved in testing, making 278 participants for the
    academic side.[↩](#fnref6)

7.  <div id="fn7">

    </div>

    Talkoo comes from the Finnish language and refers to community
    collaborative work.[↩](#fnref7)

8.  <div id="fn8">

    </div>

    The Dusk board had been created by David Sjunnesson, a former
    student of mine who had collaborated with Göransson, Olsson, and
    myself on a project ‘1scale1’, dedicated to the production of
    prototypes of products and installations.[↩](#fnref8)

9.  <div id="fn9">

    </div>

    A now obsolete design for a board that could communicate using
    Bluetooth, for example with Android phones running Android Froyo and
    later.[↩](#fnref9)

10. <div id="fn10">

    </div>

    The Arduino Mega ADK board was born from the Google design, the
    Android ADK board. It was intended for experiments with the
    connection of devices—via a USB cable—to Android phones and tablets
    in order to trigger the applications that could use the data
    generated by the external devices or accessories.[↩](#fnref10)

11. <div id="fn11">

    </div>

    Google IO is the Google annual developers conference, where the new
    features of the Google ecosystem of platforms and tools are
    announced.[↩](#fnref11)

12. <div id="fn12">

    </div>

    In 2005, while a guest researcher at the Interaction Design
    Institute Ivrea, I worked with my brother, Diego Cuartielles, on the
    creation of a platform to design feedback mechanisms using motors.
    Unfortunately this work was not documented publicly.[↩](#fnref12)

</div>
