4 Methodology
=============

In this chapter I reflect upon the methodological tools I have used when
developing the projects analysed in this thesis. A number of tools were
chosen once already engaged in the design process. This late
selection—and sometimes design—of the tools was dictated by the size of
the assemblage I was dealing with, as I was just one of many actors in a
large network, to borrow some actor–network terminology, and it was hard
to anticipate potential issues such as the power dynamics among
participants, the availability of technical resources, and so on. Over
the years, I have developed a methodological toolbox based on four main
clusters of methods: reflection in action; openness; use, participation,
action, and activism; and inclusive or multiple prototypes.

These ways of approaching the projects all stem from my choice to apply
a research through design (RtD) methodology (Gaver 2012) in my work. I
have already noted the existence of RtD when talking about annotated
portfolios and repertoires, a notion taken from Schön (1983b, 60) (see
Chapter 3). While it is possible to find earlier references to RtD,
Gaver’s is the most succinct description in his 2012 paper ‘What should
we expect from Research through Design?’

One key aspect of large-scale prototypes of the type discussed in this
thesis—the Arduino case being the most significant one—is the
user–researcher relationship. The prolonged interaction with users of
different sorts—project users and end users—addressed in this chapter
has helped me develop a specific understanding of possible roles and the
kind of knowledge an expert in the field requires when performing
studies on existing platforms or large prototypes of upcoming platforms.

Reflection in action
--------------------

Platforms, as structures implemented in and on top of actor–networks to
facilitate relationships between actors, are in constant change.
Platforms do not have an end goal—they are non-teleological—as they are
in a process of continuous formation through use. Thus, the only way to
research platforms is by using them, by becoming a user; researching a
living platform is only possible through direct intervention with what
is an ever-changing process. Reflection in action (Schön 1983b) is a
working method that allows for the building of an understanding of the
research object while interacting with and through it. Schön describes
the role of the professional when dealing with a complex situation,
which could well apply to a platform:

> the practitioner … responds to the complexity … in what seems like a
> simple, spontaneous way. His artistry is evident in his selective
> management of large amounts of information, his ability to spin out
> long lines of invention and inference, and his capacity to hold
> several ways of looking at things at once without disrupting the flow
> of inquiry. (Schön 1983b, 130).

According to Schön, the feedback in an analysis like this occurs
simultaneously with the praxis, through language and in a dialogic
process.

As researchers we need a way to trace the relationships between the
actors in an actor–network. For example, if some users participate in
the creation of a new software feature and they would like others to
know how to use it, they need a way to inform others. Documentation (for
an understanding of the function), feedback (for collaboration on the
co-design), and reflection (for the discourse about the platform) are
the mechanisms of a platform, and relevant to our research process
because they register the traces of the relationships between the actors
in the network, and not just the meta-data (who talked to whom and
when), but also the intentions and results of the different processes
(the actual information exchange between parties).

Looking at the way I selected the various cases that would make up my
research portfolio, it is plain that mine was a hands-on approach to all
the projects, including those referred to here but not in the
compilation, such as the building of the Arduino community. My research
has spanned code and electronics for building interactive devices, art
installations, online tutorials, university courses, academic year long
education programmes for schools, embedded tools, and platforms. My
fieldwork, documentation, feedback, and reflection has taken various
forms, depending on the context. In the creation of the Arduino project,
documentation was very much a joint effort—developers and users
documented uses, cases, and processes at all levels—and leaving aside
personal communication by email, mostly standardized, using online
publication tools. The European research projects (SandS and PELARS) had
a twofold documentation mechanism: internal, where data was gathered and
shared with the other researchers; and external, where information was
published once it had been filtered, processed, and organized. The
documentation for the indoor location system was generated by each
participant individually, and notes were shared when necessary. Finally,
the haptics prototypes were documented with academic conferences or art
venues in mind, using standardized online tools.

Erkki Huhtamo, a media archaeologist, has coined the term *thinkering*
(a portmanteau of tinkering and thinking) for the ability to construct
knowledge of materials in flux (Huhtamo 2010). Schön’s reflective
practitioner is Huhtamo’s thinkerer, yet while the former looks at
practitioner designers (Schön 1983a, 1983b, 2001)⁠, the latter looks at
artists. Regardless of the difference, both arrive at the same
conclusion: there are ways to know through praxis. Thinkering is a
default modality when developing projects. While preparing the
technology, one looks for features and tries to anticipate as much as
possible, but then things may happen on site compromise elements of the
original design. At the same time, however, the designer gains
experiential knowledge that cannot be acquired any other way.

This raises a question of epistemology. What constitutes acceptable
knowledge? Is thinkering a field that could be contextualized as a
positivist research paradigm? Or should it be consider more as coming
from the constructivist school? According to Osterman (1998) ‘reflective
practice is a professional development strategy with roots in the
constructivist paradigm’. Therefore, the reflective practice, as well as
thinkering, should be understood as adhering to an inductive paradigm.
Descriptive research can be either quantitative or qualitative. It
involves collecting data from events, which are then tabulated and
probably displayed in graphic format to aid understanding of the data
distribution. Interventionist research, which is much closer to
thinkering, ventures into the realm of the applied, and requires the use
of qualitative research strategies with a special sensitivity to the
constructedness of data.

Reflection in action is an attempt to bridge what happens on site, while
working with the case, and what happens afterwards, when reflecting on
the work. Research through design (RtD), which builds on the cases
collected throughout a research process (Gaver 2012), is thus very
similar to reflection in action⁠. Gaver suggests a threefold strategy
when forming an understanding of design as a tool for inquiry and
knowledge production. After reviewing some aspects of the philosophy of
science, he concludes that RtD does not follow an existing standard
procedure with which to build cumulative knowledge; indeed, he invites
the reader to consider the design process as having a generative
behaviour. His third proposition is that practice-based research should
look at theory as the ‘annotation of realised examples’, which is where
the annotated portfolio comes in. Gaver suggests that the design
research community should avoid standardization and ‘take pride’ in the
speculative nature of the field, and its ability to produce results in
the form of new artefacts. To the suggestion that case-based research be
used to create theories, Gaver argues that theory should ‘annotate’ the
examples, but not ‘replace them’.

RtD should be valued because of its ‘ability to continually and
creatively challenge status quo thinking’ <span id="anchor"></span>RtD
should be valued because of its ‘ability to continually and creatively
challenge status quo thinking’ (Gaver 2012, 938). Therefore, forcing it
to fall into structured means of classification, or standardized ways to
measure, is, as Gaver (2012) would have it, not the best way to optimize
the outcome of research through design. This continual, creative
challenging is very much in line with Latour’s idea of description **
(1996)⁠. The role of the researcher is not necessarily to explain, but
rather to trace actors under certain circumstances when performing in
and as networks.^[^1^](#fn1){#fnref1 .footnoteRef}^ There is another
strong link between Gaver’s RtD and Latour’s material and circumstantial
tracing. Gaver mentions ‘wicked problems’ (a concept taken from Rittel
and Webber) as circumstances that cannot be theorized in advance when
working with design (Rittel & Webber 1973). It is therefore impossible
to work with a Popperian hypothetical-deductive model, based on a
systemic trial-and-error falsification process. Instead, designers
create solutions as they go, and will eventually create new theories as
well, the ultimate goal of which cannot be the falsification of a
theoretical hypothesis that did not exist in the first place. Gaver
summarizes this by saying that ‘the synthetic nature of design is
incompatible with the controlled experiments useful for theory testing’
(2012, 940), once more confirming the inductiveness of RtD.

RtD accords a major role to the artefacts that result from a design
activity. Annotated portfolios are a way to bring together the ‘ultimate
particulars of the artefacts rather than abstracting across instances as
language does’ while still allowing for ‘extensibility and
verifiability’ (Gaver 2012, 937). On the other hand, no matter how
valuable these portfolios may be for the creation of generalized
theories, their role should be limited to inspiration and annotation.
The artefacts are boundary objects that can be fed back into the
process.

The outcomes of the creative endeavours I have been involved with, along
with their side projects, have given me a rich collection of cases—in
number and content—open to theoretical reflection. However, I face the
issue that in some of the processes in which I was involved, the speed
at which the project developed and the amount of data generated made it
impossible for me to document it fully. Even if I did not have a
standardized way of collecting information, though, I still gathered
experiences in different ways. For example, in the Arduino project, most
information is publicly available in the Arduino forum I put in place,
while in the SandS project the documentation took the form of a research
report and an instruction manual, so that other researchers could repeat
the same kind of experiments. Documentation was not my role in the
haptics projects, but my colleagues did a good job of registering the
results of the work. What matters here is not the collection of data per
se, but the fact that each one of the cases referred to, by being
included in the compilation, is now part of my annotated portfolio. They
are the cases that comprise my expertise, in this case in platform
design.

RtD assists in the creation of theories in five distinct ways, again
according to Gaver (2012). The first is the clustering of conceptual
statements from the analysis of multiple cases. Design researchers draw
on concepts and models from other disciplines to inspire new designs and
articulate existing ones. If the notions brought into the design field
are adapted to the new context, the process becomes ‘translation’ and
can generate new concepts. A third way of producing theories is through
the creation of manifestos. These look at contemporary practice and how
to alter it to generate a desirable future. Manifestos ‘borrow theories
to justify’ themselves. Frameworks for design are described as
manifestos, but are involve less theorizing and are less normative;
rather, the framework implies an ontology of factors that leads to a
theoretical result. Finally, there is the preformatted process of
standardizing practice, evaluation, and outcome. This last method,
established in the discipline of human–computer interaction is not to
Gaver’s liking, as we have seen.

I wrote a manifesto as a prelude to my research studies (Cuartielles
2004)⁠, while I produced a series of cases where I designed or
co-designed specific tools and platforms to be used by different types
of users in a variety of contexts. Even if I did not initially consider
producing an annotated portfolio, I noticed how my work gradually
adopted that form. Portfolios range from design reports to user
manuals. Documenting a platform like the one in the SandS project
(Cuartielles & Taylor 2013b)⁠, which is made of six different boards and
complex software on different machines in the users’ homes and on the
cloud, in just a couple of pictures and a short text would have been a
very challenging exercise in synthesis that would have omitted many of
the nuances of the design. By developing a process of annotation
(explaining, in retrospect the relevance of the design as contextualized
in my work process), and by tracing the common thread between the
projects in the present thesis, I have constructed theories and research
openings to build upon. In RtD, theory is a boundary object between
cases, and not just the abstracted superstructure above them.

Openness
--------

My understanding of openness as a method stems from the very pragmatic
approach to design where there is no interest in making something that
is not meaningful or useful. This is the line taken by Björgvinsson et
al. (2012) in their concept of the ‘Thing’⁠, where design exists to be
used as much as possible, whether in a second life (upcycling, as in the
case of the SandS project in which we we upcycled home appliances), in a
modular approach that allows the integration of one’s designs into other
people’s (as in the creation of Arduino, a platform of modular
electronics), or by whatever means will ensure a more sustainable design
(see Chapter 5). From this perspective, an open design implies an
element of democratization, as in Alexander et al. (1977), with the
openness guaranteed by a distributed process, sharing responsibility for
the design with the community as a whole.

A community collaboration on co-creating a platform comes with a caveat:
ownership of the system so created falls to the network itself. In her
essay ‘While Waiting for the Third Industrial Revolution: Attempts at
Commoning Production’, Seravalli (2014) ⁠studies the example of
Fabriken, a makerspace in a cultural centre in Malmö, Sweden, as a
complex assemblage of humans and non-humans, and how sharing of spaces,
tools, and knowledge works over time, and concludes that it is an
example of ‘commoning’—a process of continuously re-evaluating the
notion of ownership, access, and the use of resources. In a space like
that, where it is impossible to work in isolation, the distribution of
authorship becomes a useful method of generating relationships between
actors.

Published in the same anthology as Seravalli, my essay ‘How Deep is Your
Love’ introduced the idea of ‘radical openness’:

> Arduino’s designs are not radically open from a process viewpoint.
> When we made Arduino, we built upon years of accumulated experience in
> teaching electronics to beginners. We did not sit down with users to
> create our first boards. We knew what needed to be done. The
> participatory design aspects of the creation had been done in the form
> of fieldwork by all of us. We decided back then that using expert
> knowledge about users, about technology, and about the relationship
> between users and technology should become our development method.
> (Cuartielles 2014b, 163)

I would distinguish between ‘radical openness’ and plain ‘openness’. The
difference between my radical openness and Seravalli’s commoning lies in
the concept of authorship. Once Arduino went from being an idea to
becoming a product with intellectual property owned by a company, there
was a differentiation between ‘us’ and ‘them’. Us, the designers, had to
consciously distribute and share knowledge with them, the users or
community. The first Arduino boards were born from expert knowledge,
published as a service to the community, but there was no radically open
process where users were involved, influencing the shape of the board or
the basic firmware. Those were decisions made in isolation, and only
later shared openly with the rest of the community.

When co-creating a piece of software, being radically open in a network
that operates over a large geographical area—potentially even
globally—is fairly simple. If all participants have the same compiler
and the same source code, all of them should get the same binary file.
In the world of hardware, this kind of co-creation is less easy, because
it requires a great deal more information. Thus there is another take on
radical openness that has to do with the openness of the production
process: it is not only the human process that has to be open, but the
non-human element in the assemblage should also be traced in a way that
will make it replicable. This is something that the open-source hardware
community has discussed extensively, especially how to manufacture a
certain design. Making something radically open is more than getting
access to blueprints. There are lists of materials, manufacturing
processes, sometimes even the thickness of the copper on a printed
circuit board: all of it matters for the proper functioning of the
artefact, and just seeing at the logical design is not enough. This
concept has been incorporated into the open hardware licence models (by
extending the licence coverage to more than just the logic design) as
well as in the community list of best practices (Ayass & Serrano 2012;
Open Source Hardware Association 2012).

As in SandS, PELARS, the collection of haptic feedback prototypes, and
all the other the projects I have been involved in, with the exception
of the indoor location system (Casas, Cuartielles, Marco, Gracia & Falcó
2007), my involvement with users—my design practice—was predicated on
the principle of radical openness, as the designs were custom-fit for
the project and required the direct involvement of everyone
participating in the projects in order to be really effective and
deliver the projects on time. It is important to mention that, as a
pragmatic researcher, it was relevant for me to take a practical
approach and gain a good understanding of the existing socioeconomic
dynamics. Openness became a tool to exchange insights into the process
with others, a knowledge-trading mechanism, the access card to a reading
club—except that the books, as in every sociotechnical assemblage, were
written on the fly.

The results for all of the projects in this compilation (besides the
location system) were generated under the same premise: the creation
process was open, and whatever resulted from the projects, both tools
and platforms, had to be released as open-source software and hardware.
There is a political aspect to this which I omitted from my manifesto
(Cuartielles 2004)⁠ due to a lack of experience. I have now explored it
in retrospect by looking at the implications of openness—availability of
sources, transparent processes, and distributed collaboration—all of
which should be expressed in the shared definition of community
practices. Seravalli’s commoning (2014) is thus very close to my radical
openness, for it is not just a question of someone making a design and
licensing it openly for others to use, but rather of opening the
conversation to the rest of the actor–network and sharing more than just
the generated knowledge. Radical openness has this other layer of
meaning, an openness about processes and intentions, because it aims to
involve others in influencing the design process. Transparency is all.

But how can openness as a method be operationalized in contemporary
society? Which are the boundary objects that will enable radical
openness to be deployed on systems? Are good intentions towards your
fellow beings in the actor–network sufficient? My experience, in
retrospect, is that this is not always the case, but there are
mechanisms or boundary objects that make it possible to repurpose
openness as an inventive methods of sorts (Lury & Wakeford 2012), where
the licence for the design becomes the enabling device that catalyses
the process. It is to open licensing as a form of methodological
activism that I will now turn.

### Licences are contracts

The question of licensing is key to contemporary design practices,
especially if digital components are involved in the process, whether
hardware, software, or documentation. Licences are devices that can help
open up a design process, as we have seen, and they set the rules of
sharing in ways that have become standard in contemporary society. Tools
such as creative commons (Lessig 2004, 282–6)⁠, free software (Stallman
2002, 92–4)⁠, or open hardware licences (Ackermann 2009; Ayass & Serrano
2012) offer designers, engineers, artists, and even whole communities of
co-creation and co-learning the legal tools—the so-called ‘open
licences’—to share their creations, whether made individually or
collectively. Open licences are relevant because people (users and other
creators) want to know about the possibility of reusing others’ designs
(Candeira 2006). For example, Arduino’s support system registers weekly
emails where people ask about the possibility of, say, making a book
using Arduino boards, or whether they would have to open source their
own Arduino-powered products because they are using an open-source
development tool.

Open licences work in the digital world, but also in the material one,
especially if there is the possibility to express the physicality of
something as a digital file. For example, the artwork for a printed
circuit board can be stored in a human-readable digital file, and it
could eventually be protected under the laws of copyright (since it is
human-readable), which is what gave the Arduino founders the idea of
licensing Arduino board’s blueprints under a creative commons licence.
This is what led Arduino and many of the Arduino derivatives, such as
the Arduino Lilypad, to use such a licensing schema, as Powell (2012)
⁠noted when analysing the history of open design.^[^2^](#fn2){#fnref2
.footnoteRef}^

But why open licence as a method? Are not licences mere tools? What is
that they are proposing that is so different from the existing
intellectual property tools? Open licences barely existed in the
twentieth century, and by the time the licences appeared, society had
been operating for a long time with a legal framework that seemed to be
functional. If you invented something, you could patent it and then
decide if you wanted to allow others to exploit the outcome of the
design; if you wrote a book or a song, copyright law automatically
protected you. While an actor–network can take out patents as boundary
objects to control the relationships between creators, manufacturers,
and users of technologies, these legal mechanisms hinder the possibility
of having more open processes in place later. As an activist researcher,
could I reasonably expect people to participate in a co-design process
on condition that I would to take the results, patent them, and retain
the right to exploit the results?

In the realm of immaterial products and services, open licensing has
been strongly optimized. From an IxD perspective, processes have been
relieved of any kind of friction that might stop people from using them.
The creation of open licences has been automated behind APIs in order to
minimize the burden for creators, but also to enable digital platforms
to take advantage of those creations (Creative Commons 2017)⁠. For the
platforms’ part, the use of APIs allows for the fast population of
content-centric platforms, such as YouTube or Flickr, with perfectly
reusable, broadcastable content. Flickr (Yahoo Help 2017)⁠ or YouTube
(Brown 2017)⁠, offer the possibility of licensing content in different
ways. Price—open, free licences cost nothing, unless you want to enforce
them in court—as well as the possibility of doing it oneself or in an
automated fashion may also be reasons to use open licences.

In design and engineering circles there is a certain aversion to
patents, since they have proven unworkable for smaller players in
competition against large commercial interests (Ackermann 2009,
194–195)⁠, which in some cases own thousands of patents (Hixon 2013). If
intellectual property protection through copyright and patents makes no
sense for creators, it makes even less for receivers of the designs
(Hippel 2005, 114)⁠. Why then bother using patents to restrict the use
of a tool or system to those we choose? Besides the more practical
aspects of non-open licensing schemas (price, time to market), there is
also a fundamental moral aspect that speaks against them. Imagine you
co-designed a device, process, or service within a community as an open
process. While it would be possible to patent something as a group, how
would that form of intellectual property protection play out in the
context of infrastructuring and the creation of things? I believe that
openness as a method demands that one anticipate the questions that
participants might have in this regard, and therefore familiarity with
the shared ownership models for intellectual property will be key in
creating the right atmosphere of cooperation between participants.
Therefore, licensing is relevant to openness as a method, and should be
introduced to community participants early on.

Use, participation, action, activism
------------------------------------

When users and designers engage in the co-creation of platforms, they
take on different roles depending on the size of the actor–network,
among other factors. These roles are not a constant, but like the
projects themselves they evolve. The one that seems to be fixed, though,
is that design researchers assume the intentionality of being willing to
pursue a certain project, which turns them into catalysts in the
actor–network. As the project evolves, users too turn into active
agents. Participation in a network occurs at the intersection of two
different axes: the user axis and the designer axis. Users in ideal
communities are expected to be active participants. As Alexander et al.
(1977) remark, the distribution of power is possible if working with
communities small enough for all members to be engaged in the governance
of the system. As platforms mean many actors can interact at once and
participate in the process of continuous construction of the platform,
it also becomes easier to be a mere user whose voice is harder to hear
in the crowd. In a different strand of analysis, I look at the
differences between action research and activist research as co-existing
methodologies for designers to enrol in co-design processes within
platforms or as a way to develop and maintain platforms. I also revisit
the role of the expert to gauge how designers might best manage their
own expertise in processes such as the ones analysed in this thesis.

First, the existing design methods for participation. The computer
scientist Gerhard Fischer (2003) compares user-centred design (UCD) with
participatory design (PD) as a way to introduce meta-design and its
defining activity ‘underdesign’ as a way to create design spaces for
others. UCD focuses on the activities and processes taking place at the
time of design, and largely ignores ‘support systems as living entities
which can be evolved by their users’. UCD designers generate solutions
for users who are relegated to a reactive role. PD involves users in
‘the process as co-designers by empowering them to propose and generate
design alternatives themselves’. PD implies actively pursuing social
inclusion and the active participation of users; however, this puts a
strain on the system, which as to evolve to suit new needs (what I term
reprogrammability). The system has to account for changing tasks and
needs in order to incorporate new technologies. It is here that Fischer
suggests the application of meta-design as a way to bring in users as
co-designers of platforms, not only from the first, but for the whole of
the platform’s life. Underdesign is the strategy or method taken from
meta-design that ensures that users will be genuine co-creators of the
platform.

I have experimented with both action research and activist research.
They differ slightly in terms of who to involve as active stakeholders
in the design process. According to Stringer (2014, 6)⁠ action
research’s ‘primary purpose is to serve as a practical tool for
developing solutions to problems experienced by stakeholders in the
context’. In Stringer’s eyes, it is devoted to helping people in finding
solutions to their problems, and the researcher is there to provide them
with a formula—that he has tested multiple times—to gain control of
their situation and arrive at the optimal outcome. Activist research
(Hale 2001), meanwhile, aims to better understand the root causes of the
issue in question, done in collaboration with people who are subject to
those conditions; it is used to formulate strategies for transforming
those conditions and achieving the power to make the changes effective.
Others in the activist research community have argued that neither
action nor activism are necessarily participatory (Chatterton et al.
2007), looking instead to participatory action (or activist) research
(PAR), but for the purposes of this thesis, I hold both action research
and activist research to be participatory in nature.

Comparing Stringer’s and Hayles’ research methodologies, we can find
slight differences in how they address the issue of participation in the
design process. Action research, as presented by Stringer (2014)⁠,
engages those who might help solve the end user’s issues, but not
necessarily the end users themselves. In that sense, action research
covers UCD, but not necessarily PD. Activist research, on the other
hand, works directly with the end users by making them the vehicle of
change, a method that is closer to PD. As a platform researcher, both
methods are needed: activist research to get closer to the end users,
action research to get closer to those behind the platform’s governance
model (developers and promoters of the platform, mostly). This is the
methodological approach I took during the SandS project. I learnt to
separate ‘end users’—an imaginary group who would have installed the
SandS system in their kitchens—from ‘project users’—the other
researchers who used the prototypes to run tests, simulate scenarios,
and develop their parts of the project. Given that the project users
were also the main designers defining the infrastructure’s usage and
governance model, my role became that of action researcher, engaging
with them to figure out the best way to create a platform aimed at third
parties. My design report on the SandS project (Cuartielles 2014a)
included in the compilation here was created in collaboration with the
project users, but mainly was addressed to them. The design we
created—the ecosystem made up of the SandS motherboard and its module
boards—required a manual for project users to use in approaching end
users when working on their appliances and connecting them to the SandS
cloud (Cuartielles & Taylor 2013b)⁠. We created this system with the
intermediaries (the project users) between us and the end users in mind.
The concept of the intermediary, as presented in Chapter 2, is taken
from Callon (1991) as project users come with a baggage—‘the skills, the
knowledge and the know-how they incorporate’ (135). The PELARS project
was no different to SandS in this regard (Cuartielles et al. 2015)⁠. I
had to design an electronics prototyping platform that would allow
others to run experiments with end users. Those ‘others’ were my
partners in the research process, just as in the SandS project; it was
the project users and not the end users who were ‘my’ users.

By the time the SandS project started in 2012 I had already been part of
the Arduino project for over seven years. While, at the time, I thought
that I was engaged in action research, because of the interaction with
thousands of end users on the Arduino Forum and via email, I later
realized that what I was doing was far more like activist research, not
so much because of the aforementioned difference in approach to user
participation, but because of the political agenda behind the openness
in design that we gave the platform (Löwgren & Reimer 2013; Cuartielles
et al. 2018)⁠. Activist research (Hale 2001) aims to develop a third
category of research, a hybrid one called ‘user-oriented basic research’
where the researcher does not set aside her personal beliefs. There is
objective reflection on the facts, but not at the cost of sacrificing
one’s worldview. Activist research brings an ‘additional demand for
empirical rigor’ and a ‘well developed methodological canon’ (14)
because of the way researchers become involved in the research process.
In activist research, the researchers have to identify their deepest
ethical–political convictions and use them to formulate their research
objectives. Prior to establishing the research question, researchers
have to engage in a dialogue with the users to be studied. As a matter
of fact, this dialogue will continue during the development of the
project, and the ‘activist scholars’ will have to give it special
priority. The research design must entertain the possibility of people
in the project having different views, and there is the partnership with
existing organizations to bear in mind—the research objectives have to
coincide either partly or entirely with what stakeholders think is
relevant to know.

An open dialogue with users is a key aspect of my research. For years I
interacted on a daily basis in the Arduino Forum, a part of the platform
structured as an open discussion list with topics determined by end
users, and moderated by a subset of those end users. As an example of
the interactions in the forum, there is the ‘Leonardo vs Vinciduino’
controversy in 2011–2012 (Arduino Forum 2011, 2012a,
2012b).⁠^[^3^](#fn3){#fnref3 .footnoteRef}^ This began when the Arduino
developers wrongly released a version of the Arduino IDE—the software
used to program Arduino boards—which included information on a yet-to-be
released hardware board. Armed with that information, a radically open
collaborative process resulted in a board christened Vinciduino, which
was somehow compatible with the still-unreleased Arduino Leonardo
board.^[^4^](#fn4){#fnref4 .footnoteRef}^ When we did finally release
the IDE and the Arduino Leonardo board, the few changes we had
introduced made the community-made Vinciduino board incompatible. This
was a case when we brought our expert knowledge to bear, acting in what
we thought was in everyone’s best interests—and taking the role of a
benevolent dictator of sorts.^[^5^](#fn5){#fnref5 .footnoteRef}^ The
power of the Arduino actor–network was manifested by the release of
reference designs that did—or did not—include others’ suggestions, but
also by moderating the conversation, mostly because dialogue no longer
functioned among the parties involved. It is almost impossible to be
engaged in such emotional situations and keep a completely objective
view of the process, and this is where activist research as a method
gives me the framework to participate, as much as I need to grasp the
fundamental dynamics of the platform.

For reference and to give a sense of why being so engaged in the process
is relevant from a methodological perspective, it should be noted that
we built the Arduino Forum to give anyone a voice in the process of
building the platform. The platform rules, a standard set of terms and
conditions, were augmented by Nick Gammon, one of Arduino’s most active
forum members with over 28,000 interactions in the forum at time of
writing. Gammon published a series of posts in the same discussion
thread, including explanations on how to use the forum, but also
instructions on how to behave as a participant (Gammon 2013)⁠. This is
an example of how to create a governance model where developers and end
users share responsibilities and together build a platform that
accommodates user’s needs. While developers produce the technology,
users decide the interaction at the social level. The Arduino Forum,
which currently has more than 580,000 registered users, active members
in 9 language groups, and more than 3.5 million posts (Arduino Forum
2017)⁠, is an example of a user-governed platform.

Other ways to involve users in a long-term relationship with a platform,
as Fischer says, include underdesign, or making sure developers create
opportunities for community members not only to co-design the platforms,
but to continue participating in after the initial launch (Fischer
2003). Even if back in the 1970s the term underdesign had yet to be
defined, the project ‘Autoprogettazione?’ by the Italian designer Enzo
Mari was a good example of such an approach. Mari (1974) created a
furniture exhibition catalogue for people to build by themselves with a
very limited toolbox (hammer and nails) and wooden planks of just one
width⁠. Mari wanted users to become active participants in the design
process. The one thing Mari asked for was for photographs of the
furniture that people built from the blueprints. This call for feedback
was the seventies’ version of Gaver’s probes (Gaver et al. 1999; Gaver
et al. 2004). There were plenty of similarities in the formal aspects:
the audience was limited, and thus clearly targeted, they were given a
probe of sorts, and they were asked for something back, and they could
choose whether to answer or not. Mari’s blueprints differed from Gaver
et al.’s probes in intentionality and expected outcome. While Mari’s
blueprints were intended to draw the user into the process as a
participant, Gaver et al.’s probes are just a way to collect insights
from the user’s everyday life. While the probes put the users in the
position of continuing to build everyday objects, Mari underdesigned
from the first.

What is left for designers to do in processes such as these? Should we
teach future designers how to underdesign instead of how to design?
There is a tension between underdesigning and creating scalable
prototyping situations that involve technology, mainly if users need to
acquire certain skills to become active participants in the co-creation
process. How are users supposed to collaborate in the creation of a
platform that has yet to be built? Similarly, are there any specific
skills that designers should acquire when designing platforms? I will
therefore turn to the idea of the designer as expert, with expertise
obtained in multiple co-design processes in interaction with the
platforms’ various actors.

### Emerging as expert

The role of the expert when approaching a case should be one of
‘research facilitator, working with and supporting people to engage in
systematic investigation’; pragmatic work for the action researcher,
intent on achieving ‘effective action’ (Stringer 2014, ch. 1) and
successful projects which are the result of a negotiated process between
users and designers, who are sometimes equally active recipients of the
action. Stringer explains that heeding the users’ discourse will
‘unleash energy, stimulate creativity, instil pride, build commitment,
prompt the taking of responsibility, and evoke a sense of investment and
ownership’. There is a very simple logic to such a way of thinking: an
empowered user can be very useful in reaching a successful conclusion to
a project. Stringer links this to Habermass’s ‘communicative action’.
Dealing with open-ended research in a design project such as PELARS,
when there is only a limited amount of time to produce it, requires
decisions about when it is worth applying Stringer’s approach and when
not. My role both in SandS and PELARS was to design the underlying
technology to be used by others in performing user tests. The way we
approached participation was to produce a proof of concept prototype to
be tested by project users, in order to determine how best to try out
the systems with end users.

When it comes to the creation of electronic platforms with certain
features like the ones presented in the PELARS project <span
id="anchor-1"></span>When it comes to the creation of electronic
platforms with certain features like the ones presented in the PELARS
project (Cuartielles et al. 2015; Spikol et al. 2015)⁠, there were few
people in the world who could be listed as experts. Sections of the
research community associated with the Tangible and Embodied Interaction
(TEI) or Computer Human Interaction (CHI) conferences might have an
understanding of the nuances of systems similar to the PELARS
electronics prototyping platform, but cross-referencing that group with
researchers who have experience of scaling-up projects to hundreds or
thousands of users and the result is a handful of people. This was the
situation when I joined the PELARS project. I was positioned as the
expert, and as such I anticipated some of the decisions taken by the
other researchers in order to ensure the success of the project, largely
by having a fully functional and deployable prototype that would be
tested by users in more than 100 cases.

Given my experience from the SandS project, which was in its closing
phases just as PELARS started, I could anticipate many the potential
technical issues with the expected affordances (by the project users) of
the PELARS system. As the time we had to spend on the prototype was very
limited—typically EU research projects have to be produced and tested in
36 months—I applied my expert knowledge to shortcut some of the
technical challenges behind the design. This decision came at a price,
for it is clear to me that my design decision influenced the outcome of
the project from the moment it shaped the core aspects of the technology
involved. My expert role in the design of the PELARS project was no
different from that of co-founder of the Arduino platform back in 2005,
when creating the first Arduino board. We had decades of accumulated
experience in project-based teaching scenarios with hundreds of
students, had helped with hundreds of projects, and therefore had a
clear picture of what was needed in order to create a circuit board that
could accommodate the needs of many of our students. This approach to
the expert’s role is different from the one described in the action
research or activist research literature, which both demand constant
contact with users in order to collaboratively create solutions to their
issues. True, that contact did exist in the creation of the EU projects
prototypes and the Arduino platform, but it required considerable
technical effort before the design was ready to be put in the hands of
users to be iterated with their feedback. The novelty of the systems was
one reason, as users had no idea it was possible to have an electronic
system that could be reprogrammed for education purposes (Arduino), or a
system that could be physically reconfigured and visually programmed to
build design objects (PELARS). A proof of concept was needed in both
cases just to start the conversation with users. Therefore, the role of
the expert when dealing with projects involving new technologies calls
for a slightly different approach, as the spell has to be broken, users
need to see that things are feasible, and that technology can indeed
provide solutions they never thought of, *before* starting the
conversation about what is possible. To be told that something is
possible is not the same as having it working in your hands.

Inclusive multiple prototyping
------------------------------

What, then, was my chosen method to take prototypes to large numbers of
users? While prototypes are meant to be simulations of a final design
(Rudd et al. 1996), that does not preclude them from being tested by
large groups of people. A synchronous test of a technical or at least
technically enhanced prototype would also imply a certain degree of
scalability in technical terms. The method, which I came to call
‘inclusive multiple prototyping’ (IMP), hinges on the number of
actors—part of an actor–network—involved in testing, using, or even
learning from a platform. IMP is an ‘inventive method’ (Lury & Wakeford
2012), which implies using a device in a sociotechnological network,
where either the number of human actors (primarily users and developers)
or non-human actors, or both, was large in comparison to the average IxD
project. IMP forced me to set aside the more scholarly approaches of
paper prototypes (Rettig 1994)⁠, provotypes (Mogensen 1992)⁠, or lo-fi
prototypes (Rudd et al. 1996)⁠ that are widely used in interaction
design. All of those approaches are based on small interaction patterns
with users in order to gather a collection of cases in a valid RtD
process (Gaver 2012)⁠, or on a proof of concept for a certain device or
service that can be made quickly and cheaply as the focus of a
conversation with end users about the opportunities offered by the
technology. IMP is not just about technology, but about a combination of
products, services, and the different types of users involved. Its
principle is to prototype a real-life scenario where new technologies
and/or processes are involved.

The ‘inclusive’ element in IMP refers to the possibility of
participation being open to anyone, and is again far more in line with
the basic tenets of democratization—a central theme in this thesis. The
‘multiple’ element highlights the number of actors, but also the
vertical coverage of the platform, by looking at which of the different
layers of the sociotechnical protocols operationalize the actor–network
and provides interfaces for them all. Finally, ‘prototype’ refers to the
idea that contemporary design is never done. Even when we hold it in our
hands, it is unfinished, albeit usable, right up to the next firmware
upgrade. In a way, a platform—where long-term sustainability depends on
a continuous co-design process—is a prototype. The IMP method calls for
strategies to collect data in complex scenarios with hundreds of IoT
devices in one network. In the cases I was involved with it was
important to be able to reaching out to as many people as possible,
which required a different approach not only in terms of the technical
infrastructure of each project (which was still at the prototype stage,
of course), but also in terms of the kind of data generated, the ways to
deal with documentation, or the finances needed to put the project in
motion. It is one of the reasons why I would argue that IMP is a
research method of relevance.

Just to give some idea of how much size mattered in some of the
experiments, in the PELARS project the end users were the teachers and
students who would use the system in pilots assisted by a group of
researchers. This demanded prototypes that were as finalized as
possible, ready for systematic tests. I was responsible for the design,
manufacture, and integration of the Talkoo prototyping kit that had to
be fully integrated into the PELARS ecosystem (Cuartielles et al.
2015)⁠. In the first iteration alone the kit included 13 different
circuit boards—and 50 copies of that first kit had to be produced for
the project participants to experience how it might work and to develop
educational activities with it. A later version of the kit had only 10
boards, but over 100 copies of that kit were needed for the various
project partners, and also as a dissemination action for the project. As
a result, in order to conduct some of the project’s pilot tests and some
dissemination actions, we had to manufacture over 1,500 circuit boards
that were distributed to over a hundred partners and potential end
users. One of the partners, Malmö University, conducted over 100
experiments with groups of twenty or more users at a time. In
engineering terms, when looking at the numbers, one might well ask
whether we are still talking about prototypes or about a small
production batch of a product.

When dealing with end-user software, where the number of application
users can run to the thousands, this is definitely not a large number,
but when dealing with hardware, and pilots with scores of designs
manufactured in the hundreds for thousands of people, it reaches a
different level of complexity. It is a lot more tedious to prepare the
pilots, but still not as hard as it is to prepare the production of a
mass-manufactured product. These inclusive multiple prototypes are still
prototypes in the sense that they have not reached the market and are
not publicly available for purchase, but they are more than simple
prototypes used by single users in a more constrained test context. The
PELARS prototypes are open in nature as they do not have a defined
purpose, being the building blocks of a prototyping platform; this means
there are some things we can expect from the users, such as certain
types of projects we may have anticipated in our laboratories, but much
of it will come from the interaction of end users with the actual
devices.

Concluding reflections on mixed methods
---------------------------------------

This chapter has set out the methods I used throughout my studies when
interacting with users, building prototypes for large series of case
studies, extracting relevant information, or deciding my personal take
on the projects I am engaged in. There is a difference between my
approach and most of the literature on design, which focuses on
small-scale cases where the design researcher has direct contact with
users. I have constructed a discourse from the best practice of various
practitioners in the arts and design in an attempt to explain how my
process is not very different from theirs, except for the fact that the
outreach of the experiments has sometimes been far larger at my end,
requiring a different kind of planning and the adoption of an expert
role that might be thought contrary to the one suggested by the
literature on participatory activist research. I would suggest that it
is not in fact misguided, as the cases I have been involved in show, but
also given the fact that technology in future will be made of complex
systems with hundreds of data points, and where a different design
mindset will be needed in order to achieve successful designs.

Having coined the term ‘inclusive multiple prototypes’ for preliminary
designs that either have many parts interacting in a system, or that
have to be tested with a large set of users (or both, as in the PELARS
project), I would argue that it should be given serious consideration by
interaction designers when dealing with new computing paradigms such as
the Internet of things, that agglutinates ubiquitous computing with
pervasive computing and requires designers not just to understand the
underlying technology, but also the distributed networks and data flows.
I have successfully pursued a series of projects that can be used as
examples of a methodology that designers might find very useful; a
methodology that can be summarized as high-speed, open, user-governed
activist research, where much of the learning and contributing happens
in direct interaction with users who are trialling the prototype
platform. It is high speed because it is not possible to reach certain
stages of development with a traditional ethnographic analysis of the
work, for while it may gloss over some of the nuances of the design, at
the same time it makes it possible for it to develop rapidly as a
system.

<div class="footnotes">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <div id="fn1">

    </div>

    Comparing actor–network theory with Euclidean mathematics, one can
    say that a network is a closed, three-dimensional form that has a
    changing structure over time, where other dimensions are represented
    by changing the colours of the different parts of the volume of the
    shape, for example. The researcher traces the network at a certain
    time and under specific circumstances. The trace is a written
    description of the case, what in maths would be a bi-dimensional
    planar graph—a projection of those points of the shape that the
    researcher has been in touch with. Each point would be an actor, and
    the lines joining actors together would be the relationships
    between them. Extending the analogy to Gaver, his is an algebraic
    construction of design. An artefact is a point on the place; a
    portfolio (whether from an individual or a group) defines an area.
    Comparing different designs within the set creates a design domain,
    defines its boundaries, and helps frame the designer’s opinion on
    the topic. Making design collections helps configure the
    understanding of the field by the variability and invariances of the
    artefacts.[↩](#fnref1)

2.  <div id="fn2">

    </div>

    Open Source Hardware Association 2012a has an excellent summary of
    its history.⁠[↩](#fnref2)

3.  <div id="fn3">

    </div>

    The Arduino Forum at times keeps discussion threads open for
    years.[↩](#fnref3)

4.  <div id="fn4">

    </div>

    Arduino Leonardo is one of the so-called classic Arduino boards,
    running on 8-bit microcontrollers.[↩](#fnref4)

5.  <div id="fn5">

    </div>

    A benevolent dictator (see Chapter 5) has the power of the community
    to make decisions in case of conflict, but in principle will act
    only in the best interests of the group. In Arduino, technical
    decisions were taken in an assembly comprising the five
    founders.[↩](#fnref5)

</div>
