1 Introducción
==============

A principios de este siglo, la miniaturización de la tecnología permitió incorporar artefactios digitales en casi cualquier cosa. Ordenadores de un centímetro de tamaño que pueden capturar y transmitir datos a otras únidades de cómputo para ser procesadas en mayor detalle, pero también con capacidad para afectar al mundo físico ofreciendo retroalimentación, aunque superficial.

Esta miniaturación de sensores, actuadores y comunicación de forma simultánea hizo real la visión de la computación pervasiva y ubícua (Weiser 1991; Mattern 2005), dos paradigmas que conceptualizaron la tecnología como algo integrado en el entorno y encarnado en los humanos. Con la llegada de otras tecnologías como la identificación por radio frecuencia (RFID) (Hayles 2009) o los cripto-chips (Hafner et al. 1991), los objetos cotidianos del día a día, podrían ser asignados números únicos de identificación para digitalizar, monitorizar y procesar sus interacciones individuales. La convergencia de la identificación, sensorización/actuaciónXXX y de las tecnologías de la comunicación en las cosas fue el paradigma de la computación de Internet de las Cosas (Internet of Things (IoT) (Greengard 2015). Esta nueva comprensión del mundo (digita) estableción una situación el que los objetos, siempre activos y siempre conectados, ofrecen canales de información sin fin (englobados en ocasiones como big data) a maquinas computacionales que buscarán patrones y eventos (Brody & Pureswaran 2014). Los flujos de información ocurren a un ritmo tal que nunca será posible para los humanos competir con las máquinas en el procesado y, dadas las nuevas técnicas como aprendizaje máquina (machine learning o ML) o el aprendizaje profundo (deep learning o DL), ni tan siquiera en el análisis de datos (Rouvroy 2013; Boden 2017).

Esto plantea interrogantes sobre el rol de los humanos en estos sistemas-sistemas donde las máquinas las encargadas de determinar qué información necesita ser extraida y los eventos que ocurren en el flujo de datos. Tambie´, si todo puede ser digitalizado, inclyendo la interacción humana, ¿cual es el mecanismo para que sucedan estas interacciones? Las plataformas digitales, tal y como explicaremos a continuación, son sistemas indeferenciados donde los humanos y no humanos participan en relaciones (Gillespie 2010; Helmond 2015). El intercambio de información entre las partes es afectada a través de dispositivos omnipresentes que transmiten datos - a veces con consentimiento humano, otras veces no -  hacia espacios enormes de computación, procesado de datos y almacenamiento, que denominamos plataformas, una definición que pondremos en tela de juicio en esta tésis. Cada vez, más a más parte de nuestra nueva realidad se construye en (y a traés de) plataformas de varios tipos(Helmond 2015). Por este motivo, este tipo de sistemas, su creación y la implicación de participantes humanos y máquinas en este proceso se han convertido en un campo de estudio relevante (Plantin et al. 2016). Esta tésis se centra en las relaciones humanas en la co-creación de plataformas, pero también en la identificación de una serie de características que podrían ser asignadas a las plataformas a medida que evolucionan desde un concepto a una herramienta, y desde allí hacia un objeto de frontera en una red de relaciones.

*Diseño de Plataformas* es una tesis de compilación que aborda la teoría, práctica, y el método observado en la co-creación de varias formas de plataforma a lo largo de quince años. Durante este tiempo yo participé en múltiples proyectos, cuatro de los cuales forman parte de la compilación, mientras que otros se presentan en los capítulos de resumen para resaltar el valor de los productos secundarios de la investigación. La introducción y el análisis de los documentos de la compilación están construidos cronológicamente, debido a la importancia que tiene el transcurrir del tiempo en el desarrollo de la investigación. Todos los proyectos presentados aquí dieron lugar a prototipos - algunos grandes, alcanzando miles de usuarios - que tras las pruebas me dieron valiosas pistas para posteriores experimentos y proyectos, y también contribuyeron a las visiones y teorías registradas en esta tesis.

This a compilation thesis that addresses the theory,
practice, and method seen in the co-creation of various forms of digital
platform over the course of fifteen years. During this time I
participated in multiple projects, of which four are part of the
compilation, while others are introduced in the summary chapters to
highlight the value of the side products of the research. The
introduction and the analysis of the papers in the compilation are
constructed chronologically, because of the importance that the elapse
of time played in the development of the research. All the projects
presented here resulted in prototypes—some large, reaching thousands of
users—that after testing gave me valuable leads for subsequent
experiments and projects, and also contributed to the visions and
theories registered in this thesis.

The text is divided in six chapters, starting with the introduction,
which presents the background, research question, and limitations to the
overall process. Chapter 2 describes the theoretical framework of the
thesis, starting with a series of observations of terms that evolved
over time, offering an understanding of the field as the balance of
various pairs of values, arranged as axes in a multidimensional space of
meaning. This is followed by a series of definitions of the most
important preconceptions, which inform my discussion of what any
designer should bear in mind when designing a platform. Chapter 3 sets
out the papers included in the compilation in chronological order.
Chapter 4 charts the methodological framework, which was constructed
parallel with the development of the thesis—a series of mixed methods,
including traditional metrics, social and legal contracts, activist
research, and the creation of inclusive multiple prototypes. Chapter 5
reviews all the key projects conducted over the years (not just the ones
in the compilation) through the chosen methodological lens, resulting in
a conceptual framework fashioned using new terminology that reorients
the thinking in platform design away from the techno-deterministic and
towards the human-centric; this framework is one of the significant
contributions made by this thesis. Having initially observed the
properties of size, performance, and pace in my research, as projects
unfolded I discovered a very different set of values to take into
account when creating platforms with a co-design process. Chapter 6
reviews the research question, draws a series of conclusions, and
outlines future lines of research in platform design.

The papers that make up this compilation include a design manifesto; two
research project reports, which could be considered design diaries of
sorts; a technical journal article; and a series of short papers
exploring the new field of haptics in user interface design. While there
were other papers to consider when writing this thesis, the ones chosen
for presentation offer a comprehensive overview of the work in the
field. In the process of co-creating different platforms I played
several roles, which generated different types of results: reports,
diaries, annotated portfolios, academic articles, open-source software,
blueprints for electronic printed circuit board designs, and so on. By
intentionally selecting a range of outcomes to include in the
compilation, this thesis underlines the mixed nature of the end results
in contemporary academia.

Background
----------

<span id="anchor"></span>A study of platform creation, this thesis is
based on my work as a practising educator and on my research as a member
of various research groups at Malmö University and at the Swedish
company Arduino Verkstad AB. The work intermeshed over the years in a
series of projects that involved academic colleagues, communities of
users, and developers of different platforms. Separating out the
teaching and research timelines has been a complex exercise, but offers
readers a better understanding of the past processes involved; however,
it was not the way I experienced things, the future being a closed book.
This section contextualizes the course of my research, looking at my
research questions, the actual research, the outcome in the form of the
papers in this compilation, and how the cutting-edge technology evolved
over time.

<span id="anchor-1"></span>When I was first introduced to the field of
interaction design (IxD) in 2000, it was as an assistant professor in
the field of programming for designers. I planted the seed of what
designers learn today in terms of software at Malmö University,
disregarding many of the intricate aspects of programming in favour of
new paradigms and metaphors to explain complex concepts to design and
art students. Back then, most of the educational tools for software
learning had been created by and for engineers, and teachers around the
world struggled to create a curriculum that would accommodate the
students’ backgrounds while introducing them to the world of design with
tools that were closer to the metal than traditional computer-aided
design and graphic design tools.^[^1^](#fn1){#fnref1 .footnoteRef}^ It
was our goal to teach interactivity through tools that would allow our
students to become familiar with state-of-the-art technologies, but not
push them into becoming programmers (even if some did indeed so).

One of the pioneering designers in the field was John Maeda, who with
his publication *Design By Numbers* (1999) and eponymous software (DBN)
presented a then revolutionary way of thinking about aesthetics and
computation.^[^2^](#fn2){#fnref2 .footnoteRef}^ A number of commercial
tools for creators predated Maeda’s—Mac OS software Hypercard being one
example—but I had never been exposed to any of those, and indeed I was
unaware of Maeda’s work.^[^3^](#fn3){#fnref3 .footnoteRef}^ It would not
be until 2005 that he would enter in the picture, after I encountered
the programming environment called Processing. Fry and Reas, the
creators of Processing and former students of Maeda’s, explained in
their 2007 book *Processing: A Programming Handbook for Visual Designers
and Artists* how they created Processing ‘to teach fundamentals of
computer programming within a visual context, to serve as a software
sketchbook, and to be used as a production tool’. (Fry & Reas 2007, 1)
Processing’s original user interface had clear references to Maeda’s
DBN, having the same colour scheme, buttons, and visual distribution
(Shiffman 2009)⁠. However, it also introduced a series of new metaphors,
such as calling all of the programs ‘sketches’ and the folder containing
them a ‘sketchbook’. Processing was first used with students back in
2001 (Fry & Reas 2007, xxv).

Parallel to my work teaching software, I gradually introduced the use of
electronics to my students as a way to bring the IxD field closer to how
devices are actually designed. I set up the so-called Prototyping
Laboratory where I could introduce IxD students to sensor technology and
the use of off-the-shelf microcontroller boards to create interactive
systems. During 2003 and 2004, I experimented with commercial boards,
and later with the creation of my own boards, to give student projects
an afterlife beyond the original courses. Commercial boards then came as
demonstrator boards, and featured a whole series of parts—buttons,
screens, even small speakers—for students and professionals (and the end
users of the boards) to experiment with the technology. These
implementations rendered the actual functionality of the microchip
effectively useless by removing access to many of the microcontrollers’
input/output pins, since they were being used with parts that were
predetermined by the manufacturer of the boards. As a side effect,
adding extra parts to the electronic designs made the boards
unnecessarily expensive, which to all intents and purposes stopped the
academic community from adopting any of the designs.

In the winter of 2003, and the early days of the experiments with my
students at the Prototyping Laboratory, it dawned on me that there were
aspects that many of the student projects had in common. There were also
a series of features, or ‘affordances’ (Gibson 1986, 18; Norman 1990,
9)⁠, which the electronic boards had to have in order for students to be
able to tackle as many design scenarios as possible.^[^4^](#fn4){#fnref4
.footnoteRef}^ With that in mind, I ended up designing Malmö
University’s first contribution to the world of tools for IxD: a DIY
board that students had to assemble themselves before starting work on
physical computing projects (see Fig. XXX). It was a nameless board that
students had to solder by hand to a standard electronic circuit. They
had to prototype their projects on the boards, later making a second
iteration where the students and I would manufacture a specific circuit
board for each project. The intention behind this two-steps process was
for students to learn the difference between proof of concept and
prototype at the level of electronics. Whatever they did on the first
handmade board was a proof of concept; the following steps were
prototypes.

There was a democratic intentionality in making that first hand-mounted
electronic board, as it meant that people who did not have an education
in electronics were not excluded from the creative use of technology.
The term ‘use’ should include the direct manipulation of digital things.
Resnick et al. (1998) define digital manipulatives (DMs) as tools ‘with
computational power embedded inside’ which ‘are designed to expand the
range of concepts that children can explore through direct manipulation,
enabling children to learn concepts that were previously considered “too
advanced” for children’. Remove the word ‘children’ from that statement
and it becomes a definition of what I was trying to do with those early
prototyping boards. Through the ‘direct manipulation of the digital
materials’, in design theorist Johan Redström’s terms (2001)⁠, IxD
students could learn concepts that were previously considered too
advanced for them.

I was not alone in this. In Japan in 2004, Kobayashi and colleagues
adopted a similar process that ended with the creation of the Gainer
platform as a way to introduce students to the creation of physical
interfaces (Kobayashi et al. 2006)⁠. Another example of this type of
educational process resulted with the creation of the Wiring platform at
the Interaction Design Institute Ivrea (IDII) in Italy (Barragan 2004;
Löwgren & Reimer 2013, 111)⁠. In other words, the idea of creating
electronic platforms for prototyping emerged in different parts of the
world at much the same time. All took a similar approach, minimizing the
economic impact on the users while maximizing the possible uses of the
boards and making the programming of the digital intelligence of the
boards as simple as possible.

It was not a coincidence, then, that the Arduino platform was launched
at this point. My interest in building digital tools for my students led
me to join a number of international collaborations, one of which took
me to the IDII in 2005. There I met Massimo Banzi and Dave Mellis, and
later Tom Igoe and Gianluca Martino, with whom I co-founded the Arduino
platform in the spring of 2005. Arduino was then nothing but an
open-source tool for IxD and industrial design students to add
electronic brains and interactive behaviours to their artefacts. It was
an open-source hardware microcontroller board with an open-source
programming environment that people could use to create their own
prototypes and products using digital components. In March 2005, having
discussed the ways in which our students and collaborators used
electronics in their projects, Banzi and I designed the first Arduino
board. Dave Mellis made the necessary software so that people could
program their own interactive programs to run on the board. Dave and I
also created the bootloader, the program residing in the
microcontroller’s memory that allows programs to upload to it from a
computer. Our experience and the existing open-source software meant
this could all be produced at speed. We were confident the students at
IDII and Malmö University would find it useful, and we commissioned a
local manufacturer to produce the first printed circuit boards, to be
called Arduino (see Fig. XXX).

Once the first boards were made, we introduced the tool as part of our
standard curriculum at our respective universities. We developed a
toolbox of the interactive prototypes that included Arduino boards,
electronic components, and open-source or freemium software that our
students could use to create interactive devices. It was our
understanding that in the not-so-distant future, digital artefacts would
use screens to display information, so we built a series of examples
using Flash—the now defunct software deployment tool from Macromedia and
later Adobe—to show how to take advantage of computer screens to
prototype interactions. At this point, Kobayashi (2006)⁠, Fry and Reas
(2007) and others were publishing on the ways to connect microcontroller
boards to Flash and Processing.^[^5^](#fn5){#fnref5 .footnoteRef}^

The connection between software and hardware was a major part in
Arduino’s success as a platform. Microcontroller boards, like the ones
by Arduino, are nothing but generic peripherals to computers, and can be
used to do almost anything, from collecting information from the
environment through sensors to affecting the same environment using
motors. The Arduino project started with the creation of a
microcontroller board that could be used to extend the capabilities of a
personal computer towards the physical world. By 2005 personal computers
had lost the ability to interface the physical world in order to read
information from sensors or write to other actuators than the standard
peripherals—keyboard, mouse, and screen. Arduino is a hardware tool
designed to reverse this situation and reopen the connection between the
physical and the digital worlds. Different communities of creators in
the digital sphere use different software and hardware tools. For
example, graphic designers typically use the Adobe Creative Suite, a
package of digital tools, to process images both in raster and vector
formats. Musicians use tools such as Ableton, a digital dashboard
capable of communicating with other programs and physical interfaces
using standard communication protocols. When creating the first Arduino
hardware tools, we realized that one way to enhance the experience of
learning about digital technology was to get the device—Arduino boards
in this case—to send and receive data to existing software. By enabling
the microcontroller hardware to communicate with software previously
being used by people and thus enhancing that software so it interfaced
with the physical world, the learning curve of the Arduino boards was
reduced, which resulted in a natural increase in their adoption
rate.^[^6^](#fn6){#fnref6 .footnoteRef}^

Arduino as a tool spread quickly. We were invited to lecture to a range
of educational institutions, and this, along with my work with design
and art students, brought home to me not just what was needed in terms
of software and hardware, but also the types of documentation required
in order to learn basic concepts and the standard parts people needed if
they were to conduct basic experiments. This led me to the next
conceptual shift. I understood that having a prototyping board—a
tool—and the software that went with it—another tool—was not enough to
learn about electronics. People would need a series of templates for
meaningful activities and the electronic components necessary to
replicate them and learn the basic aspects of the technology.
Consequently, content is also very important in the process of
democratizing knowledge: what I had lacked in the microcontroller
platforms that preceded Arduino was content that would engage people in
the topic. Maeda’s DBN project included this notion of content in a form
he called courseware, as defined on the project’s website (Aesthetics
and Computation Group 2003)⁠. Courseware introduces the idea of mixing
course and software, and introduces new concepts in the form of
progressive, self-explanatory exercises. Other programming languages
such as Pure Data are by design self-explanatory due to their visual
nature. However, unlike DBN’s accompanying courseware or Pure Data’s
visual code, the world of microelectronics was not characterized by
enticing, self-explanatory artefacts. On the contrary, it was presented
in the form of datasheets and manuals.^[^7^](#fn7){#fnref7
.footnoteRef}^ Datasheets (the way engineers share information about
electronic components), and manuals (the way they explain software) were
not appropriate for the average Arduino user back in 2005. We needed to
develop examples that would interweave the building process with a more
theoretical explanation.

When we come new to a field, we do not typically possess the tools to
operate in it; starting from scratch, we need to assemble a whole series
of objects, concepts, contacts, and knowledge in what will become our
own personal toolbox. This is what set me thinking about *kits* as
conglomerates of tools, materials, and documentation. I experimented
with kits, content, and produced outcomes in the shape of prototypes,
courseware, and products in a range of fields: basic electronics (Gran
et al. 2005; Cuartielles 2010, 2012)⁠, robotics (Cuartielles & Yang
2010; Cuartielles et al. 2011)⁠, and the integration of mobile devices
and electronic prototypes (Göransson & Cuartielles 2012; Cuartielles &
Göransson 2015)⁠, among others. While I was focused on putting kits in
people’s hands, I noticed that they were building their own collections
of tools to suit their most common needs. For example, IxD students
collected sensors to measure distance, accelerometers to detect
movement, Peltier cells to heat or cool prototypes of wearable devices,
and communicators—mainly Bluetooth wireless chipsets—to get their
prototypes to communicate with mobile phones. Teachers in robotics at
upper secondary schools, on the other hand, preferred light sensors,
inexpensive DC motors, 10mm LEDs, and anything that might be handy when
creating robots with their pupils. Each new group of Arduino users I
encountered had different needs, all broadly similar to the others, but
also different enough for me to realize that those collections of parts
were characteristic of their skill sets and needs. It was these
collections of tools and small parts that I identified as toolboxes.
While kits are related to a context of use, toolboxes are related to a
context of expertise. Expertise is acquired over time and is hard to
come by in a new context with an already assembled toolbox. While kits
are not the same thing as toolboxes, they can help us gain an
understanding of what is needed and are thus indications of a toolbox’s
contents. The Arduino tools are open-ended enough to be included in both
kits and toolboxes.

In time, Arduino grew from being a multiplicity of simple open-source
toolboxes in the hands of various user groups, used for designing
electronic products and experiences, to becoming a place where people
came not only to learn about electronics, but also to share their
knowledge and experiences. By means of a series of online tools hacked
together (the original Arduino website was made of two wikis, a blog,
and a forum software), it was possible for hundreds of thousands of
people to interact with one another. This was when we realized that we
had something more in our hands: a platform of a kind, made of
electronic circuits, software, online tools, and, crucially, a community
of users who supported it in various ways.

When it came to my teaching, I jumped from spending days trying to
develop original content to spending just a few hours extracting
community-created content from the so-called Arduino
Playground.^[^8^](#fn8){#fnref8 .footnoteRef}^ A good example of this
was Anders Gran and his classmates when they documented their first
experiments with Arduino and Processing (Gran et al. 2005)⁠. When they
started there were no freely available examples of how to do such a
thing, but once they had done it and been published on Malmö
University’s website, they became an easy-to-use reference for anyone
willing to teach that specific topic. Thanks to this and similar
initiatives, I could teach my students how to become self-sufficient and
search for documentation themselves. The growth of the community made
the Arduino Playground an educational asset.

These blocks of educational content, when properly designed, can be
reused in different contexts. For example, the content in learning how
to control a motor can be used both when building a robot, but also in a
more general context when learning about possible actuators. Information
about a light sensor can be useful for a scientific experiment about the
properties of light, but also when trying to detect the presence of a
person in a room. A tool like Arduino, due to its open-endedness, can be
reused in many different contexts. At the micro level, the same is true
of the software running in the Arduino board, since the very same
program can be used to drive entirely different sensors and therefore
collect very different types of data from the world. On the macro scale,
content about a certain topic can be empirically tested on this tool,
and just a minute later a different kind of experiment can take place.
Such is the power of digital technology. Yet in Arduino’s success the
main metric has been adoption—how people tapped its properties—the
reusability of parts and content, the open-endedness of the tools, and
ease of access to a vast quantity of resources—to make Arduino theirs,
and how they then built their own toolboxes and kits from the knowledge
gained by that experience. By enabling communication through a series of
online systems, we helped create a community of users centred on the
tools. The Arduino community.

This process saw Arduino transformed from a simple tool into a platform,
with a set of kits and toolboxes designed both by us the developers, but
also by the users. It was at this point that Arduino offered interesting
case studies for my research. In the chapter on ‘Lessons learned’ I
investigate Arduino as a situated, populated learning environment, and
platform of sorts. While the effort put into creating and maintaining
the Arduino community has left its mark on my practical experiments, my
research has alternated between the various cases, from soundscape
creation to haptic interfaces. The next section sets out the progression
between the different cases, their relationship to one another, and the
topic of this thesis, the creation of platforms as modular, transferable
and generalizable systems.

### <span id="anchor-2"></span>Researching the common thread

Before helping Arduino become a successful platform for users at
different levels, I spent some time on the IxD element in the research
project ‘Micromobility and Learning’ (Cuartielles et al. 2003),⁠
exploring the possibility of using indoor positioning technologies and
other meta-data to analyse how K3 students at Malmö University would
relate to one another when working in a project-based learning
environment.^[^9^](#fn9){#fnref9 .footnoteRef}^ The results were
possible technical developments and the seeds of future technologies: a
collaborative sketchpad to allow students co-create sketches during
brainstorming sessions from a multiplicity of devices (Cuartielles et
al. 2004), a tool to design soundscapes where artists could enhance
spaces by adding 3D sound thanks to a new extended markup format
(Cuartielles & Malmborg 2004), and an indoor positioning system (Casas
et al. 2002; Casas et al. 2004; Casas et al. 2007)⁠. While the
prototypes and papers were of a highly technical nature, they had a
clear pedagogical intention, as they were produced in the context of
situated learning explored by the Micromobility and Learning project.

In one of my earlier literature surveys, I was fascinated by the work of
the British artist Fiona Raby and her partner, the critical design
specialist Anthony Dunne, at the Royal College of Arts (RCA) and by the
people in their department, where the concept of critical design (Dunne
1999)⁠ was coined. Projects such as ‘The Presence Project’ (Dunne &
Gaver 2001)⁠, ‘Flirt’ (Raby 2000)⁠ or ‘Edge Town‘ (Hooker & Kitchen
2004)⁠ have influenced how I understand design as a mix of theory and
praxis. Indeed, I still use the projects as teaching examples as I feel
they in many ways anticipated our socio-technological
present.^[^10^](#fn10){#fnref10 .footnoteRef}^ The reports and websites
for these projects are classic examples of how to do research through
design (see Chapter 4) using electronic objects as an interface between
researchers and users. The objects themselves were not the outcome of
the research project; they were vehicles for learning more about
behaviour and interaction patterns. Aesthetics—as in the knowledge field
of participatory and multisensory experience—played a significant role
in all of the projects, as did the ambition to creatively and
unconventionally explore the use of technology.^[^11^](#fn11){#fnref11
.footnoteRef}^

From the same school of practice, and indeed in response to some of the
early literature, William Gaver’s notion of cultural probes (Gaver et
al. 1999)⁠ was one of the concepts that most influenced my first
explorations in design. Given Gaver’s later revisions to his own method
(Gaver et al. 2004) to alert designers to users and their lives⁠, it
should be noted that the ‘Cultural Probes’ study I conducted in 2003 was
questionable in many ways. I created a cultural probes package designed
to make usability tests for a technical device, the Anoto pen, using the
very premises that Gaver et al. were to criticize in their revised
method (2004). Cultural probes were designed to tap into an
auto-ethnography of sorts from users that was otherwise difficult to
reach, and the results of the analysis should be considered as nothing
more than inspiration, suitable as a guide for the design process,
despite my intention having been a quantitative analysis of the results
of applying the method to a real-life scenario.

It was around that time that I drew up a manifesto for design involving
users, electronic objects and everyday situations. The ‘Resign Desearch’
text (Cuartielles 2004)⁠—which is included in the compilation here—set
the tone for how I would operate from then on. I would focus on creating
tools together with users, and through those interactions would create
design collections. One example of this work was the series of joint
projects with my students in 2004–2005, when we built an automated
confession booth, a mobile phone with an address book hacked to react to
the amount of alcohol in the user’s blood—stopping her from calling
certain people when inebriated—and a chair that would first ask someone
to sit on it and shortly after complain about the person’s weight. This
collection of interactive pieces was only possible thanks to the
students’ collaborations, and it helped me identify the way tools could
be created so that students could build their own systems. By making the
right choices when it came to the technology, students could not only
implement the pieces by themselves, but they could contribute to the
creation of a learning tool that would be reused by subsequent cohorts
of students. Some of the pieces, being influenced by RCA’s critical
design ideas, were intended to inspire users, illustrate a concept, or
even highlight a weakness; others were conceived as explorations of
future products and services.

In parallel, I was concluding an extended collaboration with the
University of Zaragoza on the ‘Micromobility and Learning’ project. One
of my demonstration kits, the Sound Space Development Kit (Cuartielles &
Malmborg 2004),⁠ had been created with reusability in mind. A platform
for sound artists to create 4D sound experiences in a 3D space that was
10×10×10 metres, it used an indoor positioning system developed by the
University of Zaragoza together with a software I designed for
wirelessly connected handheld computers, and an XML format I defined
(Cuartielles et al. 2003)⁠ to geolocate sounds in space and over time,
it was a demonstration kit that I presented at a couple of academic
meetings. The project had concluded by the time Arduino was created in
2005, having ended with a journal article (Casas et al. 2007)⁠.

One of the issues with digital technology at this point, as previously
noted, was the lack of inexpensive and user-friendly tools for designers
to start building prototypes. Arduino changed that landscape and my own
modus operandi considerably. I had access to inexhaustible supply of the
same reusable electronic brick to base my designs
on,^[^12^](#fn12){#fnref12 .footnoteRef}^ and there was a community that
could furnish my need for certain snippets of code, and sometimes even
anticipate it.^[^13^](#fn13){#fnref13 .footnoteRef}^ And since every bit
of Arduino technology was open source and built on multiple open-source
components, it was possible to reuse it in multiple ways⁠.

With Arduino taking off as a platform, I realized that it would be
interesting to research how to apply some of the knowledge generated by
that community to other cases. At the invitation of the Centro Cultural
de España en México I embarked on a three-year co-design process to help
relaunch a computer clubhouse for children. My contribution was to help
establish processes, train a manager for the space, and create
educational content, even co-designing a DIY robot with the help of a
modified Arduino board, accommodated to the technology availability in
Mexico City (Cuartielles & Yang 2010). The process took me further along
the road of consciously reusing content, tools, and processes in other
projects.

That was also the nature of my work done together with Stenslie,
Göransson, and Olsson (Cuartielles et al. 2012a; Cuartielles et al.
2012b, 2012b, 2013; Olsson et al. 2012; Stenslie et al. 2014), included
in this thesis. We collaborated on a series of prototypes to give
physical feedback to users via haptics, and then to connect the users’
bodies remotely using mobile technologies. The process of creating each
prototype was a group effort, in which everyone had a different role but
all joined in the ‘heavy lifting’ of construction, especially for
prototypes with, for example, 120 interactive touch-points on the body.
The projects advanced my research by requiring communication protocols
and the creation of algorithms to allow hybrid sensor–actuator networks
of hundreds of devices to transmit their state to the rest of the
physically connected network, but also to others remotely.

My final block of research relevant here corresponded to my activities
as head researcher for Arduino Verkstad AB, working on two EU research
projects, SandS and PELARS.^[^14^](#fn14){#fnref14 .footnoteRef}^ The
process built on the idea of creating modular electronics, but this time
by looking at the devices (sensors, communicators, actuators) with a
view to making the ‘smart’ by designing an interconnection protocol that
will allow for devices to be hot-plugged into the system and
automatically negotiate their addresses. For the SandS project I
co-designed a kit to help the researchers from the other participating
institutions to connect any existing kitchen appliance to the SandS
Internet cloud. This cloud would allow end users to instruct their
kitchen appliances using instructions uploaded by other end users. In
that way, if someone was to try to remove a strawberry juice stain from
a white shirt, he would use his mobile device to interact with the SandS
cloud, which following a semantic analysis would offer the best existing
match for the task and then remotely control the appliance for the user,
giving it a set of instructions that we called recipes. The SandS
project provided the first in a series of prototypes that were still not
fully ‘smart’ in terms of how the system had to be implemented. The
scenario of use included a technician who would come to the end user’s
home to hack the existing appliances, combined with a computer
application program so the various parts would interact with the cloud.
PELARS built on the knowledge generated in the previous project to
generate a more polished prototype ready for real-life experiments with
relatively inexperienced users. In this case, a novice user would take
boards corresponding to sensors or actuators and plug them together as a
single communicator board using a bus configuration. Using a visual
programming environment based on a flow paradigm, users could then
program the relationships between devices, thus determining how devices
exchanged information with one another and with other artefacts.

This, of course, was all part of the natural evolution of prototyping
platforms. Platform designers today are creating modular systems much
like the proof of concept we made for the PELARS project, designed to
minimize the amount of time needed by users and developers to put
together interactive systems composed of multiple sensors and actuators,
system intelligence and communicators. I continue to study the
relationships between users and connected systems, based at the Internet
of Things and People Research Centre at Malmö University. The experience
I have gained in building platforms—both from technical and user-centred
perspectives—is in my opinion an asset when looking at how society sets
about embracing the IoT paradigm. If it is true that everything that can
be connected will be connected, as IoT promises, what are the
implications? How will IoT be explained to people? How will we designers
help developers communicate with users, and how will we involve all of
them in building the IoT platforms of the future? How will IoT transform
our understanding of society and how we relate to others? These are all
questions that we as design researchers must address, and will be
touched on as I explore IoT in this thesis. As the concept of IoT has
taken shape parallel to the research presented in this volume, my work
in IoT is best understood as an exploration of the social and material
premises of the field, materialized in the form of prototypes,
communication protocols, file formats to represent physical properties,
educational platforms, and wearable art installations.

Research questions
------------------

I work with demystifying technology and envisioning how to understand
the future of ‘sensors, communicators, and actuators’ as Hayles (2009)
interestingly chooses to label off-the-shelf smart devices. Such
devices, with their ability to exchange information with other systems
within a certain network, promise to be the building blocks in the
creation of other artefacts. My research questions are thus whether this
modularity, which we might refer to as transferability (in the sense
that its affordances could be transferred to other designs) and
generalizability (its properties could become a standard), constitutes a
basic feature for a ‘platform–thing’—a sociotechnological construct for
the running of reconfigurable applications—yet at the same time a
sociomaterial artefact for collaborative learning? And given the
definition of a ‘Thing’ by Björgvinsson et al. (2012)⁠ as a
‘socio-material assembly’—and my own definition of platform–thing—which
kind of functional requirements can lead the design work towards the
creation of a platform? In the context of this thesis, the questions
have to be rephrased by asking whether the ability to reuse a system (or
parts of it, taking advantage of its modularity) and reprogram it
(changing its functionality without necessarily changing its materiality
in order to accommodate one’s needs) could be basic properties of a
platform.

In this thesis I explore this and a number of follow-on questions in
depth. I present a series of cases (Chapter 3) in which I participated,
and I will chart how the aspects highlighted in the theoretical
definition of platforms (from Chapter 2) coincide with the properties of
transferable and generalizable systems. I also respond to the questions
in my literature analysis (Chapter 2), where I introduce the concepts,
or rather preconceptions, which are transformed into a different
collection of terms, as confirmed in the presentation of the cases and
methods. The terms that will help designers when referring to the
outcome of their own projects are set out in ‘Lessons learned’ (Chapter
5), which traces the paradigm change in how to look at platforms that
from the realization that humans are part of a larger assemblage that
joins systems and people together. To articulate this, I argue that
designing new technologies for learning (though it could be extended to
other cases too) should allow for the better integration of humans in
these assemblages, being more respectful of a variety of wishes and
needs.

Limitations
-----------

The work presented in this thesis has to be contextualized within the
scope of technologies for the creation of prototypes of devices,
experiences, and services in the field of IxD. The text is a summary of
thoughts, readings, and findings, and aims to provide guidelines on how
to refer to the artefacts and software produced during a design process,
both during and at the end. Far from being a purely theoretical body of
work, my research has been conducted by direct involvement in the
co-creation of systems as part of or in collaboration with various teams
of people over extended periods. Sometimes it took years to iterate
concepts and prototypes due to the nature of the projects themselves,
the funding available, or—when in the lack of funding—people’s
availability to work for free within a project.

My role in different projects has varied. In some cases, I designed the
technology, in others I facilitated the community while doing system
maintenance, and I even became the main designer for EU-funded projects.
This multidisciplinary approach both within the teams and around my
research persona required that I adopt a range of strategies in order to
cope with design situations. I had to develop an understanding of how to
behave in different cases and how to get projects off the ground. But it
was not always possible to do everything as I would have liked, being a
team player-cum-activist, in the sense of Hale’s activist research
manifesto (2001).

Even though I have worked with hundreds of stakeholders over the years,
I did not focus on the ethical aspects that now engage contemporary
thinkers. Privacy and data sharing were not my primary concern when
working on the creation of connected home appliances for the SandS
project. Not that I am unaware of the potential downsides of new
technologies such as always connected, always-on devices, but it was not
my duty in the scope of that project. The same applied to the PELARS
project, where we built interactive prototyping platforms to gather data
about how students interacted with one another and to send reports to
both students and teachers. There was an ethics group within the
project, but I was not directly involved in its work.

Nevertheless, it is worth dwelling on the shift from a problem-based
toolbox approach to a community of learning as embodied by platforms.
Toolboxes belong to the realm of experts, as I will explain in Chapter
2, and are grow from the individual experience of a person navigating
the field. On the other hand, communities are built through the
interaction of many people and can have different governance models,
which in turn may determine their agendas for thought and action. While
the expert responds to the rules of a field, under a self-determined
governance model communities can easily drift. This has certain ethical
ramifications that must be taken into account, not the least the central
question of accountability.

The question of accountability, most acute in the concept of assemblage
(Latour 1996, 374)⁠ and the involvement of non-humans, is a source of
ethical conflict that has yet to be resolved. Can a non-human (such as a
program in a computer) or a whole assemblage (a platform) be held
accountable for its actions, or should the human creator/s of that
entity be wholly responsible for its actions? In the case of a
technologically sustained community, how should accountability be
shared? To what extent should non-humans be allowed to impinge on
community governance models, and to what extent should humans be allowed
to experiment with technological forms of power? These and similar
questions will be addressed with the help of the literature. While Jane
Bennett and others have shown that the control of everyday life is de
facto dependent upon fragile assemblages of humans and non-humans
(Bennett 2005)⁠, this will not stop us from creating new exploratory
communities of learning to deal with technology, and gives rise to even
more questions. Can a technology-driven education free us from a society
mediated by (and potentially controlled by) technology? Is technology
the cure for technology? While none of my projects or articles have
dealt directly with issues of accountability, they remain significant
ethical questions to take into account and, by democratizing
technologies, arrive at alternative approaches to scaled-up
infrastructures such as the Internet of things, which are of immediate
concern in this thesis.

Finally, there were all sorts of technological shortcuts we had to take
in the creation of many of the technologies described in this
dissertation. These technical limitations had to do with the nature of
the prototypes, and the difficulty of anticipating how well technology
will scale up in experimental settings. For example, the European
research project SandS was tested at different research facilities, but
was never put in hands of end users. In this kind of research, there is
often clear limitations on the possible outreach of technology besides
the theoretical calculations made for the project. In other projects,
such as the ‘Creative Technologies in the Classroom’ project (see
Chapter 4), in which over 17,000 users participated, it was evident that
the technical decisions we made could be scaled-up. Instead, I have to
ask myself from an activist perspective whether scaled-up is enough for
successful outreach. From a research perspective, and especially design
research, having an experiment tested with a certain degree of success
on tens of thousands of people is an obvious success, but is the
proposed design good enough to reach beyond those tests? Is the concept
itself durable? In the context of technology, which is constantly
evolving, how durable can projects be? I provide readers with the tools
to answer at least some of these questions in subsequent chapters.

Summary
-------

I came to IxD with a mixed background in project management and
microelectronics design. My first task was to create the educational
content for programming for IxD undergraduates. It was my understanding
that the students participating in my courses would have no knowledge of
the basics that I had been introduced to when studying engineering. Like
every course taught for the first time, I spent most of it trying to
convey a message that could be understood by the students given their
previous knowledge in the field.

The process of teaching was (and still is) a project in itself: when any
of my courses start, I have no clear idea of the outcome. Students
define their needs, and through their interaction with me and other
lecturers they co-create new concepts and prototypes for interaction
patterns, experiences, complex systems of products and services, and of
course electronic devices. This is the context for my research. I spend
my days interacting with others, looking for effective and sustainable
ways to develop and iterate prototypes made of software, hardware, or
both.

Over my years of work on the creation of tools, kits, and platforms, I
have been active in both theoretical and practical research on a whole
series of initiatives. I unknowingly followed the steps described by
Gaver in his 2012 analysis of research through design by beginning with
a manifesto, in which I set out the grounds for my methodology, with
collections instead of single artefacts as project outcomes, and
defining how I would relate to users doing the sort of activist research
defined by Hale (2001),⁠ where I was conducting user-oriented research
into cases that seemed worthwhile because they would enable access to
technology in novel ways for different groups of people, whether
students in Malmö, teachers in Spain, researchers in Italy, or children
in Mexico.^[^15^](#fn15){#fnref15 .footnoteRef}^

Parallel to the process of defining my working process, I co-developed
as part of the ‘Micromobility and Learning’ project (Casas et al. 2004)⁠
an indoor location system and various applications to demonstrate its
functionality. Probably the most remarkable was a system to design
soundscapes that used the positioning technology to place sounds in
space, with installations which users experienced via handheld terminals
(Cuartielles et al. 2003)⁠. My results gained me a couple of research
residencies, one of them at the IDII, where I met the people who would
join me in co-creating the Arduino platform. I spent several years
running Arduino’s web platform, which left me with a much clearer
understanding of what people were interested in when looking at
prototyping tools applied in different contexts. I became very active in
the creation of educational experiments, initially for universities and
later for schools, and moved into the creation of full educational
programmes that were deployed in several regions in Spain, Sweden, and
Ecuador.

While developing and testing educational programmes, I continued to
research the creation of wearable technologies by looking at simple
interactive systems that could be deployed in a variety of sizes, and
which would get people to connect to one another through the use of
touch and haptic feedback as an interface for remote communication. The
work done by Stenslie, Olsson, and Göransson (Cuartielles et al. 2012a)
in the field of haptics led me to think about new interactive platforms
where it would be easy to build interactive systems using a mix of
modular off-the-shelf electronics and visual programming languages. The
first step was the implementation of a new communication protocol, along
with a new flow-paradigm-based visual programming language for the
design of the taxonomy of multiprocessor systems. The two EU research
projects I led for Arduino Verkstad AB between 2012 and 2017 were
iterations of these ideas of creating expandable, multiprocessor,
hot-plug systems.

While the work on haptics looked at the creation of identical cells that
would interconnect people remotely by touch and vibration, and the EU
research projects explored the possibility of anyone being able to build
similar systems but in a much more open-ended way, my current research
on the Internet of Things and People (IOTAP) as part of the eponymous
group at Malmö University is aimed at building a more critical discourse
on the way the IoT is conceptualized and realized. My experience in
building tools and platforms means I approach the field with a critical
eye. To reach a new distributed computing paradigm like the IoT is going
to require the application of platform design thinking, and users and
developers will have to collaborate in making it happen.

<div class="footnotes">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  <div id="fn1">

    </div>

    The ‘metal’ in digital electronics refers to microchips. There is a
    hierarchy of tools, with machine code the closest to the metal
    (since everything you write is exactly as it will be stored in the
    processor’s memory). C, C++ and other programming languages are the
    next step out, and Java the next step again, since it is executed as
    a stream of code running on a virtual machine. Tools such as
    Photoshop or Audacity that handle media and have been written in
    high-level programming languages like C or Java are even further up
    in the abstraction ladder and therefore further away from the
    metal.[↩](#fnref1)

2.  <div id="fn2">

    </div>

    For the DBN timeline, see the official website at MIT Media Lab,
    http://dbn.media.mit.edu/.[↩](#fnref2)

3.  <div id="fn3">

    </div>

    There are plenty of online resources about Hypercard, which turned
    out to be successful software. For example, http://hypercard.org/
    has multiple resources and links to related projects.[↩](#fnref3)

4.  <div id="fn4">

    </div>

    Norman’s explanation is straightforward: ‘The term affordance refers
    to the perceived and actual properties of the thing, primarily those
    fundamental properties that determine just how the thing could
    possibly be used … Affordances provide strong clues to the
    operations of things … When affordances are taken advantage of, the
    user knows what to do just by looking’ (1990, 9); Gibson, on the
    other hand, introduces the idea of affordances as ‘properties taken
    with reference to the observer’ (1986, 18).[↩](#fnref4)

5.  <div id="fn5">

    </div>

    Fry and Reas’ work connecting microcontrollers to computers was done
    earlier than ours at Arduino, but their first publication came out
    two years after we released the first Arduino board and some of the
    examples.[↩](#fnref5)

6.  <div id="fn6">

    </div>

    In Arduino’s early days in 2005, the main creative packages people
    were using were Pure Data and Max/MSP for sound and live interactive
    media production, Isadora for live video mixing, Processing for
    installations, and Flash for interactive web
    experiences.[↩](#fnref6)

7.  <div id="fn7">

    </div>

    Datasheets are the way information about electronic components and
    tools is presented to developers. There is no standard for how to
    present the information, because the nature of the components and
    tools varies from one to the next. Datasheets present the electrical
    qualities, electronic functionality, and mechanical properties of a
    component.[↩](#fnref7)

8.  <div id="fn8">

    </div>

    The Arduino Playground is a wiki on the Arduino website used by
    thousands of users to document new ways to interact with sensors,
    communicators, and actuators. As blogging waned and people focused
    on smaller-scale interactions such as Facebook or Twitter, the
    Playground became a more durable collection point and source of
    information in an open and self-regulated way.[↩](#fnref8)

9.  <div id="fn9">

    </div>

    K3 is the acronym for Konst, Kultur och Kommunikation (Art, Culture
    and Communication), my home department at Malmö
    University.[↩](#fnref9)

10. <div id="fn10">

    </div>

    For example, only the Flirt project anticipated the denial of
    service (DOS) attacks to mobile phone stations, geolocalized dating
    systems, or the value of simple animated images to convey meaning
    when using mobile communications.[↩](#fnref10)

11. <div id="fn11">

    </div>

    While this thesis is not concerned with the aesthetics of platforms
    in particular, or of interactive digital systems in general, I
    should clarify my position on the aesthetic value of systems. As
    part of the School of Arts and Communication at Malmö University, I
    have come to believe that the aesthetics of digital systems (and by
    extension of life) do not rely on a traditional understanding of
    beauty, but on the sensual appeal of an artefact, process,
    or situation. Aesthetics, when viewed in this way, are strongly
    contextualized and not always generalizable. Thus, I could find
    myself exploring topics such as the ‘aesthetics of dirt’, the
    ‘aesthetics of interaction’ with a UI, or the ‘aesthetics of people
    flows in public spaces’. As the reader can imagine, this topic is
    far too broad to be explored here. [↩](#fnref11)

12. <div id="fn12">

    </div>

    The term ‘brick’ is used extensively in the production of
    modular electronics. Hence the Lego programmable brick series, of
    which the RCX was the first. Originally created by MIT Media Lab,
    the Lego programmable bricks are microcontroller systems that can be
    reprogrammed from a computer for people to build their own
    artefacts.[↩](#fnref12)

13. <div id="fn13">

    </div>

    In the open-source world, people produce code they need for
    themselves and then share it, but since it is early days yet, it is
    expected that the needs of one person will be the needs of multiple
    people at once. In that sense, some people can anticipate the needs
    of others—not that they can see the future, but their needs are
    similar for historical reasons.[↩](#fnref13)

14. <div id="fn14">

    </div>

    Arduino Verkstad AB is the Swedish branch of the Arduino
    LLC company. It changed its name in 2018 to Arduino AB. SandS is the
    project ‘Social and Smart: Social housekeeping through
    intercommunicating appliances and shared recipes merged in a
    pervasive web-services infrastructure’ (grant 317947) which ran
    between 2012 and 2015 (http://www.sands-project.eu/). PELARS is the
    ‘Practice-based Experiential Learning Analytics Research and
    Support’ project (grant 619738), which ran between 2014 and 2017
    (http://www.pelars.eu/).[↩](#fnref14)

15. <div id="fn15">

    </div>

    See Chapter 4 for the full definitions of activist research, which,
    according to Hale 2001 aims at developing a third category of
    research, a hybrid one that should be called ‘user-oriented basic
    research’.[↩](#fnref15)

</div>
